CHAPTER

1 Introduction

Animation 11.1: Levels of Organization
Source & Credit: wonderwhizkid.

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

BIOLOGY AND SOME MAJOR FIELDS OF SPECIALIZATION

Biology is the study of living things. It is a branch of science and like other sciences it is a way of
understanding nature. Biologists deal with the living part of nature and with the non-living things
which affect the living things in any way. they strive to understand, explain, integrate and describe
the natural world of living things. The literal meaning of biology is the study of life.

It is very difficult to define life. There are certain aspects of life that lie beyond the scope of the
science of biology like the answers to the questions : what is the meaning of life? Why should there
be life? These are the questions not usually taken up by Biologists and are left to philosophers and
theologians. Biologists mainly deal with the matters relating to how life works.

Life, for biologists, is a set of characteristics that distinguish living organisms from non-living
objects (including dead organisms). Living organisms are highly organized, complex entities; are
composed of one or more cells; contain genetic program of their characteristics; can acquire and
use energy; can carry out and control numerous chemical reactions; can grow in size; maintain a
fairly constant internal environment; produce offspring similar to themselves; respond to changes
in their environment.

Any object prossessing all these characteristics simultaneously can be declared as a living thing
and in an object for biological studies.

The science of biology is a very wide based study. It includes every aspect of a living thing. Therefore,
volumes and volumes of information are available under this major head. It is but natural to divide
the science into quite a number of branches for our convenience of comprehending and studying
biology.

You are surely familiar, at this stage, with Ecology, Embryology, Physiology, Morphology (external
Morphology or Anatomy), Palaeontology, Histology, Evolution, Genetics, Zoogeography etc. These
are branches of biology which deal with environmental relations, development, functions, structure,
form and internal gross structure, fossil, tissues, ancestral history, heredity and distribution of
animals in nature, respectively. In addition to these branches there are a number of other branches
of biology such as: Molecular Biology, microbiology, Marine Biology, Environmental Biology,
Freshwater Biology, Parasitology, Human Biology, Social Biology, Biotechnology, etc.

@) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Animation 11.2 : Biology
Source & Credit: oopkey

Molecular Biology
Molecular biology is a branch of biology which deals with the structure of organisms, the cells and
their organelles at molecular level.

Animation 11.3 : Molecular Biology
Source & Credit: wifflegif

G) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Environmental Biology

Environmental Biology is the study of organisms in relation to their environment. This includes
interaction between the organism and their inorganic and organic environment, especially as it
relates to human activities.

Microbiology
This is the study of microorganisms which include Bacteria, Viruses, Protozoa and microscopic

algae and fungi..

Animation 11.4 : Microbiology
Source & Credit: giphy

Freshwater Biology

This branch of biology deals with the organisms
living in freshwater bodies i.e., rivers, lakes etc
and physical and chemical parameters of these
water bodies.

—* 4

= = =n, ” 7
GoolScienceGilstumblp

Animation 11.5: Freshwater Biology
Source & Credit: orimogif

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Marine Biology
This is the study of life in seas and oceans. This includes the study of the marine life and the physical
and chemical characteristics of the sea acting as factors for marine life.

Parasitology
This is the branch of biology which deals with the study of parasites. The structure, mode of
transmission, life histories and host - parasite relationships are studied in parasitology.

Human Biology
It deals with the study of man. This includes form and structure, function, histology, anatomy,
morphology, evolution, genetics, cell biology and ecological studies etc. of human beings.

Social Biology
This is the branch of biology which deals with the study of social behaviour and communal life of
human beings.

Biotechnology

It deals with the use of living organisms, systems or processes in manufacturing and service
industries.

G) V: 1.1

Animation 11.7 : Biotecnology

Hundreds of chemical reactions are involved in maintaining life of even the simplest organism. In
view of this, it is something of surprise to find that of the 92 naturally occurring chemical elements,
only 16 are commonly used in forming the chemical compounds from which living organisms
are made. These 16 elements and a few others which occur in a particular organism are called
bioelements.

In the human body only six bio-elements account for 99%of the total mass.

1. Introduction

70

eLearn.Punjab

The six commonest bioelerments account for

60 99% of body mass
oxygen 65%
< 50 carbon 18%
a hydrogen 10%
= 40 nitrogen 3%
g calcium 2%
ic 30 phosphorus 1%
wu
&

20
10
0

Other bioelements include (about 1%) - potassium (0.35%), sulphur
(0.25%), chlorine (0.15%), sodium (0.15%), magnesium (0.05%),

iron (0.004%), copper (trace), manganese (trace), zinc (trace),

lodine (trace).

Fig 1.1 Percentage composition of bioelements by mass of a human being

The fact that the same 16 chemical elements occur in all organisms, and the fact that their properties
differ from those in the non living world, shows that bioelements have special properties which
make them particularly appropriate as basis for life.

Biological organization is not simple. It has high degree of complexity because of which the living
organisms are able to carry out a number of processes (some very complicated) which distinguish
them from the non living things. A living thing has built-in regulatory mechanisms which interact
with the environment to sustain its structural and functional integrity.

A living thing is, therefore, composed of highly structured living substance or protoplasm. In order
to understand the various phenomena of life, biologists for their convenience, study the biological
organization at different levels starting from the very basic level of sub atomic and atomic particles
to the organism itself and beyond which the study of community, population and entire world are
included.

Biological organization can be divided into the following levels.

7) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

That part of earth inhabited by living
organism: includes both the living
and the nonliving components

Biosphere

A community together with
its nonliving surroundings

Two or more populations of different
Community] speices living and interacting in the
same area
Population Members of one species inhabiting
the same area |
Very similar, potentially interbreeding
organisms

Multicellular] An individual living thing
composed of many cellls

Ecosystem

Two or more organs working together
in the execution of a specific body
function

A structure normally composed of

several tissue types that form a

functional unit

A group of similar cells that
perform a specific function

The unit of life
A structure within a cell that
Organelle | performs.a specific function

Vilcro-
molecules
and Macro

ce ere ee SS
C

a)

Nerve Call

@® ©

Chloroplast Nucleus |

oe mL gl

A combination of atoms

The smallest particle of an element os aN la os
Atom that retains the properties of that Z = ae /, SS)

element Nitrogen] Oxygen
. &

Subatomic | particles that make up an atom Proton | Electron|
Particles

Fig 1.2. Levels of Organization

Atomic & Subatomic Levels
All living and nonliving matter is formed of simple units called atoms and sub atomic particles such
as protons, electrons & neutrons.

Molecular Level

In organisms elements usually do not occur in isolated forms. The atoms of different elements
combine with each other through ionic or covalent bonding to produce compounds. This stable form
is called amolecule. Hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorous and Caarethe most common
atoms found in biological molecules. The different types of bonding arrangement permit biological
molecules to be constructed in great variety and complexity. These may be micromolecules with
low molecular weight like CO,, H,0 etc. or macromolecules with high molecular weights e.g. starch,
proteins etc.

Biological world has two types of molecules: organic and inorganic. An organic molecule is any
molecule containing both carbon and hydrogen. Inorganic molecules do not include carbon and
hydrogen together in a molecule.

An organism is usually formed by enormous number of micro and macro molecules of hundreds
of different types. Some most important and abundant organic molecules in organisms are glucose,
amino acids, fatty acids, glycerol, nucleotides like ATP, ADP, AMP etc.

Animation 11.8 : Molecular Level

Source & Credit:

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Orga. elles & Cell

Different and enormous number of micromolecules and macromolecules arrange themselves in
a particular way to form cells and their organelles. In case of simple organisms like bacteria and
most protists, the entire organism consists of a single cell. In most fungi, plants and animals, the
organism may consist of up to trillions of cells.

Numerous sub-cellular structures like mitochondria, Golgi-complex, endoplasmic reticulum,
ribosomes etc have been studied for their structure and function. It has become clear that functions
of the cells are accomplished by these specialised structures comparable to the organs of the body.
These structures are called organelles.

The arrangement of the organelles speaks of the division of labour within the cell. The prokaryotes
have only a limited number and type of organelles in their cytoplasm. Eukaryotes are rich in number
and kinds of membranous organelles. A cell membrane is however present in all cells whether
prokoryotic or eukaryotic.

MAKE GIFS AT GIFSOUP.COM

Tissue Level

In multicellular animals and plants, groups of similar cells are organized into loose sheets or bundles
performing similar functions; these are called tissues. Each tissue has a particular function in the
life of the organism e.g. muscle tissue, glandular tissue, xylem tissue, phloem tissue etc. They are
specialized for contraction (movement), secretion, conducting water and for translocation of sugar,

proteins etc.
V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Orga. & System

Different tissues having related functions, assemble together in a structure to carry out its function
with great efficiency. Such structures are called organs and they are specialized to perform particular
functions. For example stomach which is an organ has a function of food digestion (protein part),
has a secretory epithelium which secretes the gastric juice, and a muscular tissue (Smooth) for
contracting the walls of the stomach and mixing the food with the enzyme thoroughly and moving
the food to the posterior end. The formation of organs also has a selective value because this leads
to an efficient accomplishment of their functions both qualitatively and quantitatively. In animals

bowel CNS &
autonomic

endocrine
system

inflammatory
hemostatic
endothelial

kidn
systems aneys

lungs
Animation 11.10: Cell Organelles
Source & Credit:

(11) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

organ formation is far more complex and defined. Organs are part of organ systems where total
functions involved in one process or phenomenon are carried out.

The organ level of organization is much less definite in plants than it is in animals. At the most,
we might distinguish roots, stems, leaves and reproductive structures. Clear cut functions, the
distinguishing features, can be assigned to each of these structures. Roots are involved in anchoring
the plant, storage of food and procuring water and minerals. The shoot supports the entire plant
while the leaves are primary organs for food manufacture. Flowers or other reproductive structures
are involved in producing the next generation (reproduction).

The complexity of the organ systems of animals is associated with a far greater range of functions
and activities than is found in plants.

I. dividual (Whole Orga. ism)

Various organs in plants and various organ systems in animals are assembled together to form an
individual - the whole organism. The whole organism has its individuality as far as its characteristics
are concerned. It is different from other members of the same species in certain respects. The
various functions, processes, activities of an organism are coordinated. In an animal all the systems
work in coordination with each other. For instance if a man is engaged in continuous and hard
exercise, not only his muscles are working but there is an increase in the rate of respiration and
heart beat to supply the muscles with increased oxygen and food which they need for continuous
exercise. In animals the coordination is achieved by means of nervous system and endocrine
system, whereas in plants only long term regulation of activities is brought about by hormones.

Organism works as a whole and it interacts and responds to the environmental changes as a whole.

Populatio.

A population is a group of living organisms of the same species located in the same place at the
same time. Examples are the number of rats in a field of rice, the number of students in your
biology class, or human population in a city.

Population is a higher level of biological organization than organism (whole) because here a group
of organisms of the same species is involved. This level of organization has its own attributes which
come into being by living together of a group of organisms of the same species.

Some of these attributes are gene frequency, gene flow, age distribution, population density,
population pressure etc. All these are new parameters which have appeared due to population of
an organism. You will study them in detail in population ecology.

(12) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Commu. ity

Populations of different species (plants and animals) living in the same habitat form a community.
Communities are dynamic collections of organisms, in which one population may increase and
others may decrease due to fluctuation in abiotic factors. Some communities are complex and
well interrelated, other communities may be simple. In a simple community any change can have
drastic and long lasting effects.

The foregoing account makes it clear that an organism can be studied at different levels of
organization. It can be studied at subatomic, atomic, molecular, macromolecular, organelle, cell,
tissue, organ and organ system level. We can also look at it as an individual, as a part of population
of similar individuals, as a part of a community that includes other populations and a part of
community of an ecosystem which includes abiotic factors as well as living organisms, Fig. 1.2.

The organisms, interaction can take many shapes. It may be predation, parasitism, commensalism,
mutualism and competition.

Livi. g World i. Space

Living world of today is enormous in size. It has been reproducing and evolving since the time
of its origin on this planet. Today almost all parts of the world abounds in living organisms. The
distribution of organisms in space can be studied through biomes.

A biome is a large regional community primarily determined by climate. It has been found that the
major type of plant determines the other kind of plants and animals. These biomes have, therefore,
been named after the type of major plants or major feature of the ecosystem. The major biomes of
the world you will study in the chapter of ecology.

LIVING WORLD IN TIME

Since the time of origin of life on this planet, various organisms were evolved and dominated
this planet during various periods of geological time chart. This has been found by the evidence
obtained from the discovery and study of fossils which allows biologists to place organisms in a
time sequence. As geological time passes and new layers of sediments are laid down, the older
organisms should be in deeper layer, provided the sequence of the layers has not been disturbed.

(13) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

In addition it is possible to date/age rocks by comparing the amounts of certain radioactive isotopes
they contain. The older sediment layers have less of these specific radioactive isotopes than the
younger layers. A comparison of the layers gives an indication of the relative age of the fossils
found in the rocks. Therefore, the fossils found in the same layer must have been alive during the
same geological period.

You can have an idea about the temporal distribution of various forms of life both plants and
animals in the various geological periods ( fig.1.3).

Era and or Plants
periods

Cenozoic era
Quaternary
Tertia

Mesoraic era

Cretaceous 135M ig
Jurassic 180M
Triassic 225 Mi

Palaeozoic era ) \X a=
Permian 270M Age of reptiles
Carboniferous 350M ae Archaeopteryx
Devonian 400M Coal- forming *.

age, spore- Age of amphibia
Silurian 440M bearing trees *,
Ordovician 500 M a
Cambrian 600 M Age of fishes

Animals

Hosp aris,

flawering
lanits

Gymnosperm
Reptiles

Proterozoic era 2000M G A of trilobites
Fungi and 5 J Common vertebrate
age of algae . ! ancestor

=
bn
a

1
i
i]
i |
i]

iy

=
=

First living organisms
(about 3000 M years ago)

=
san ll

+“

Fig 1.3. Fossil record of plants and animals shown in a geological time chart

V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Phyletic Li. eage

When we look at the biodiversity (the number and variety of species in a place), we find that there
are nearly 2,500,000 species of organisms, currently known to science. More than half of these
are insects (53.1%) and another 17.6 % are vascular plants. Animals other than insects are 19.9 %
(species) and 9.4 % are fungi, algae, protozoa, and various prokaryotes.

This list is far from being complete. Various careful estimates put the total number of species
between 5 and 30 millions. Out of these only 2.5 million species have been identified so far.

The life today has come into existence through Phyletic lineages or evolving populations of the
organisms living in the remote past. Evolutionary change often produces new species and then
increases biodiversity. A phyletic lineage is an unbroken series of species arranged in ancestor to
descendant sequence with each later species having evolved from one that immediately proceded
it. If we had a complete record of the history of life on this planet, every lineage would extend
back in time to the common origin of all early life. We lack that record because many soft bodied
organisms of the past had not left their preserved record as fossils.

Biological Method

Science is a systematized knowledge. Like other sciences, biological sciences also have a set
methodology. It is based on experimental inquiry. It always begins with chance observation.
Observations are made with five senses viz, vision, hearing, smell, taste and touch, depending
upon their functional ability. Observations can both be qualitative and quantitative. Quantitative
observations have accuracy over qualitative as in the former variables are measurable and are
recorded in terms of numbers. An observer organizes observations into data form and gives
a statement as per experience and background knowledge of the event. This statement is the
hypothesis, which is tentative explanation of observations.

At this stage you should look at the ways of devising hypothesis. There are two ways of formulating
hypothesis. A hypothesis can be the result of deductive reasoning or it can be the consequence of
inductive reasoning.

Deductive reasoning moves from the general to the specific. It involves drawing specific conclusion
from some general principle/assumptions. Deductive logic of “if ....... then” is frequently used to
frame testable hypothesis. For example, if we accept that all birds have wings (premise #1), and that
Sparrows are birds (premise # 2), then we conclude that sparrows have wings. If all green plants

(15) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

require sunlight for photosynthesis, then any green plant when placed in dark would not synthesize
glucose, the end product of photosynthesis. The other way of reasoning used in the formulation
of hypothesis is inductive reasoning which is reasoning from the specific to the general. It begins
with specific observations, and leads to the formation of general principle. For instance, if we know
that sparrows have wings and are birds, and we know that eagle, parrot, hawk, crow are birds, then
we induce (draw conclusion) that all birds have wings. The science also, therefore, uses inductive
methods to generalize from specific events.

In fact sometimes scientists also use other ways to form a hypothesis, which may include (1)
intuition or imagination (2) esthetic preference (3) religious or philosophical ideas (4) comparison
and analogy with other processes (5) discovery of one thing while looking for some other thing.
These ways can also sometimes form basis for scientific hypothesis. Hypotheses as you already
know, are subjected to rigorous testing.

Repeated exposure of a hypothesis to possible falsification increases scientist's confidence in the
hypothesis when it is not falsified. Any hypothesis that is tested again and again without ever being
falsified is considered well supported and is generally accepted. This may be used as the basis for
formulating further hypothesis. So there is soon a series of hypotheses supported by the results of
many tests which is then called a theory. A good theory is predictive and has explanatory power.
One of the most important features of a good theory is that it may suggest new and different
hypotheses. A theory of this kind is called productive.

Animation 11.11 : Biological Method
Source & Credit:

V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

However even in the case of productive theory the testing goes on. In fact many scientists take it as
a challenge and exert even greater efforts to disprove the theory. If a theory survives this skeptical
approach and continues to be supported by experimental evidence, it becomes a scientific law. A
scientific law is a uniform or constant fact of nature, it is virtually an irrefutable theory. Biology is
Short in laws because of elusive nature of life.

Examples of biological laws are Hardy-Weinberg law and Mendel's laws of inheritance. You will learn
about them in later chapters. You can see that laws are even more general than theories and afford
answers to even more complex questions, therefore there are relatively a few laws in biology.

BIOLOGY AND THE SERVICE OF MANKIND

The science of biology has been helping mankind in many ways in increasing food production; in
combating diseases and in protecting and conserving environment. Biological advances in the field
of food and health have resulted in high standard of living.

Plant production has been tremendously increased by improving existing varieties and developing
new high-yield and disease - resistant varieties of plants and animals used as food.

Plant and animal breeders have developed, through selective breeding, using the principles of
genetics, new better varieties of wheat, rice, corn, chicken, cow and sheep. Poultry breeders have
developed broilers for getting quick and cheap white meat. Genes for disease resistance and other
desirable characters are introduced into plant, using the techniques of genetic engineering. Such
transgenic plants (plants having foreign DNA incorporated into their cells) can be propagated
by cloning (production of genetically identical copies of organisms/cells by asexual reproduction)
using special techniques such as tissue culture techniques etc. Plant pathogenic fungi and insect
pests of crops which weaken the plants and reduce the yield had traditionally been controlled
by using chemical fungicides and insecticides (pesticides). Use of these chemicals poses toxicity
problems for human beings as well as environmental pollution. Moreover, there are chances of
insects becoming resistant to the effect of these chemicals. Biological control (control by some
living organisms) eliminates all such hazards. In biological control, pests are destroyed by using
some living organisms that compete with or even eat them up. An aphid that attacks walnut tree is
being controlled biologically by a wasp that parasitizes this aphid.

(17) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Even some bacteria are being used as bio-pesticides. Effective control of a particular disastrous
disease, or all the common diseases of a plant can be achieved by using all relevant, appropriate
methods of disease control. Such an approach of disease control is called “integrated disease
management”.

Soil is a complex medium. It is almost impossible to conduct experiments on nutrient requirements
of plants by growing them in soil. Hydroponic culture technique is used to test whether a certain
nutrient is essential for plant or not. In this technique the plants are grown in aerated water to
which nutrient mineral salts have been added. Hydroponic farming, however, is yet not feasible.
Astronauts may use it for growing vegetables.

Different techniques of food preservation have been developed for protecting food from spoilage
and for its use and transport over long distance without damaging its quality. One of these is
pasteurization, developed by Louis Pasteur. It is being widely used for preservation of milk and
milk products.

Disease Control

There has been fantastic progress in the area of health and disease control. Three pronged actions
are usually taken against various diseases.

1. Preventive measures

2. Vaccination/Immunization

3. Drug treatment/Gene therapy

Preventive measures

The advances in biological sciences have provided us information about the causative agents of
the diseases and their mode of transmission. For instance the AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome) is caused by HIV (human immuno deficiency virus) and it spreads through free sexual
contact, through blood transfusion, by using contaminated syringes or surgical instruments etc.
Therefore, doctors advise us to take precautions on these fronts so that we do not contract the
disease, which is at present incurable. Similarly hepatitis is caused by H.virus which is spread
through blood transfusion by using contaminated syringes and surgical instruments etc. In this
case also doctors advise us to be careful and avoid the point of contact.

Vaccination / Immunization
Many diseases such as polio, whooping cough, measles, mumps etc can easily be controlled by

vaccination or “shots”.
V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Edward Jenner first developed the technique of vaccination in 1796, cowpox pus is known as vacca
(from latin vacca=cow). From this word evolved the present term vaccination and vaccine. You will
learn more about vaccination in chapter 6.

Since then, inoculation or vaccination is carried out to make the people immune from viral or
bacterial epidemics or, for some diseases the individuals are vaccinated in their early life to make
them immune to those diseases.

It is claimed that small pox has been totally eliminated from the world by using this method.
Scientists are making continuous efforts to develop vaccine against other diseases. Even vaccine
against AIDS is being administered in humans on experimental basis.

Drug treatment / Gene therapy

If a person becomes sick with disease, he is subjected to the action of antibiotics which can kill
bacteria. The antibiotics are, however, useful in bacterial disease and that only when bacteria have
not developed resistance to antibiotics. In cancer, radiotherapy and chemotherapy are also
used. In radiotherapy, the cancerous part is exposed to short wave radiations from the radioactive
material repeatedly at regular intervals. In Pakistan there are several centres which are carrying
out radiotherapy to control cancer. Chemotherapy consists of administrating certain anticancer
chemicals to the patients at regular intervals. These chemicals may kill both cancerous and normal
cells.

Recently a new technique has been developed to repair defective genes. This consists of isolating
the normal gene and inserting it into the host through bone marrow cells. This is called gene
therapy.

Combating disease utilizing all methods as and when required and ensuring a participation of
community in this programme is known as integrated disease management. This requires
awareness of the community about the severity of the problem, its causes and its remedies. This
is avery effective programme for elimination and control of dangerous diseases from the human
society.

Besides its contribution to food production and health of man, biology has discovered a number of
means and developed technologies for the welfare of mankind as for example cloning, protection

and conservation of environment etc.
V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Cloning: Cloning is a technology for achieving eugenic aims. A clone is defined as a cell or individual
and all its asexually produced offspring. All members of a clone are genetically identical except
when a mutation occurs.

Generally no normal animal reproduces naturally by cloning. Several insects and many plants do,
in some circumstances whereas few do so regularly.

In 1997 scientists in Scotland succeeded in cloning a sheep. Other mammalian species (mice and
cows) have since been cloned. In this procedure the nucleus from a fertilized egg is removed and
a nucleus from a cell of a fully developed individual is inserted in its place. The altered zygote is
then implanted in a suitable womb where it completes its development. The new individual formed
in this way is a genetically identical clone of the individual whose nucleus was used. Thus cloning
could make multiple copies of a desired genotype.

Another type of cloning is the division of a single egg or early embryo into one or more separate
embryos. This is the same process that normally creates identical twins. Offspring from this type of
cloning are genetically identical but carry chromosomes from each of the two parents. This type of
cloning has already been used to produce genetically identical cattle and other farm animals.

Man is likely to adopt cloning techniques for commercial production of valuable animals of known
pedigree such as horses etc.

At some places scientists are making attempts to clone human embryo which they believe can
serve as transplant donor. There is a lot of controversy on this issue as to whether human cloning
should be attempted or not.

PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF ENVIRONMENT

Industrialization has helped mankind to raise the standard of living. It has at the same time
destroyed our environment. Tons of industrial waste, and effluents in solid, liquid or gas form are
being injected into the environment by the industries. These effluents frequently contain sizeable
amount of certain very toxic even carcinogenic materials. Heavy metals like lead from automobiles,
chromium from tanneries, are playing havoc to human health. Environmental pollution has reached

alarming level in some countries.
V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

This problem, therefore, needs to be addressed or else it would soon be out of control in which
case the biocomponents of the world ecosystem would suffer irreparable loss and this environment
would no longer support life on this planet.

Biology has helped mankind in attracting attention to this problem and the biologists are striving
to find the solution to set this environment right wherever it has deteriorated: Biologists have
already asked for the treatment of industrial effluents to be made obligatory. Several ways of
bioremediation (removal or degradation of environmental pollutants or toxic materials by living
organisms) are also under investigation. For example algae have been found to reduce pollution of
heavy metals by bioabsorption.

Biologists are also working out the list of endangered species of plants and animals which if not
protected would soon be extinct. They have, therefore, stressed the needs for their protection.

The environmental pollution is a national problem in Pakistan. Our rivers, canals are highly polluted
with the mixing of city sewage and industrial wastes. The life in fresh water of Pakistan is towards
decline. Fish populations have been most adversely affected. We need to take protective measures
as early as possible. In cities, particularly the exhaust from automobiles is enormously adding lead
into the atmosphere. There is then a need for lead free petrol to reduce the pollution.

Animation 11.12 : Protection and Conservatin of Environment
Source & Credit: epd.ntpc

(21) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

Q.1. Fill in the blanks

(i)

is the study of organisms in relation to their environment.

(ii) The study of organisms living in fresh water bodies like rivers, lakes etc is called

(iii) __ is the branch of biology which deals with the study of social behaviour and
communal life of human beings.

(iv) In the _ body only six bio-elements accounts for 99% of the total mass.

(v) All living things and nonliving things are formed of simple units called ___

(vi) Various organs in plants and various organ systems in animals are assembled together to form
an

(vii) A ___ iS a group of organisms of the same species located in the same place at
the same time.

(viii) A __ _is based upon observations.

(ix) A hypothesis is a result of deductive reasoning or it can be the consequence of _
reasoning.

Q.2. Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘false’ and write the correct statement
if it is false.

(i) Penicillin was discovered by Edward Jenner from a fungus Penicillium.

(ii) Many diseases such as polio, whooping cough, measles, mumps etc can be controlled by
antibiotics.

(22) V: 1.1

1. Introduction eLearn.Punjab

(iii) Exposure to the small pox virus allows the body to develop immunity against cowpox virus.

(iv) AIDS is caused by HIV and it spreads through sexual contacts, blood transfusion, by contaminated
syringe or surgical instruments.

Q.4. Short questions.

(i) | What do you mean by hypothesis?
(ii) | How does law differ from theory?
(iii) What is deductive reasoning ?

(iv) Define vaccination.

(v) Write a short note on cloning.

Q.5. Extensive question.

(i) Define the following branches of biology:
Molecular Biology, Microbiology, Marine Biology, Biotechnology

(ii) Discuss briefly phyletic lineage in biological organization.
(iii) Write notes on the following:

(a) Living world in space and time
(b) Population (c) Community

(iv) Explain the biological method for solving a biological problem. How do deductive and inductive
reasoning play an important role in it?

(v) What is the role of the study of Biology in the welfareof mankind?

CHAPTER

2 Biological Molecules

Animation 2.1 : Molecular Biology

Source & Credit: godandscience

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

INTRODUCTION TO BIOCHEMISTRY

Biochemistry is a branch of Biology, which deals with the study of chemical components and
the chemical processes in living organisms. A basic knowledge of Biochemistry is essential
for understanding anatomy and physiology, because all of the structures of an organism have
biochemical organization. For example, photosynthesis, respiration, digestion, muscle contraction
can all be described in biochemical terms.

All living things are made of certain chemical compounds, which are generally classified as organic
and inorganic. Most important organic compounds in living organisms are carbohydrates, proteins,
lipids and nucleic acids. Among inorganic substances are water, carbon dioxide, acids, bases, and
Salts.

Typically an animal and a bacterial cell consists of chemicals as shown in the following table.

Table 2.1 Chemical composition of a Bacterial and a Mammalian cell.

1 Water 70 17
2 Proteins 15 18
3 Carbohydrates 3 4
4 Lipids 2 3
5 DNA 1 0.25
6 RNA 6 1.1
7 Otherorganicmolecules 2 2
(Enzymes, hormones,
metabolites)
8 Inorganic ions 1 1
(Na*, Ki, Ca, Meg**
Cl, SO, etc)

The survival of an organism depends upon its ability to take some chemicals from its environment
and use them to make chemicals of its living matter. For this reason, cells of every organism are

@) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

constantly taking in new substances and changing them chemically in various ways i.e. building
new cellular materials and obtaining energy for their needs. Life of an organism depends upon the
ceaseless chemical activities in its cells. This chemical activity is maintained with a high degree of
organization. All the chemical reactions taking place within a cell are collectively called metabolism.
Metabolic processes are characterized as anabolism and catabolism. Those reactions in which
simpler substances are combined to form complex substances are called anabolic reactions.
Anabolic reactions need energy. Energy is released by the break down of complex molecules into
simpler ones, such reactions are called catabolic reactions. Anabolic and catabolic reactions go hand
in hand in the living cells. Complex molecules are broken down and the resulting smaller molecules
are reused to form new complex molecules. Interconversions of carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids
that occur continuously in living cells are examples of co-ordinated catabolic and anabolic activities.

Animation 2.2: Introduction to Biochemistry
Source and Credit: wikidoc

G) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

IMPORTANCE OF CARBON

Carbon is the basic element of organic compounds.
Due to its unique properties, carbon occupies the
central position in the skeleton of life.

Covalent bonds result when two or more
atoms complete their electron shells by
Sharing electrons. When an electron pair
is shared between two atoms, a single
covalent bond results. An example is the
bond between two hydrogen atoms to form
a hydrogen molecule. Covalent bond stores

Carbon is tetravalent. It can react with many other
known elements forming covalent bonds.

When a carbon atom combines with four
atoms or radicals, the four bonds are arranged /arge amount of energy.

symmetrically in a tetrahedron, and result to give a

stable configuration. The stability associated with the tetravalency of carbon atoms makes it a
favourable element for the synthesis of complicated cellular structures. Carbon atoms can also
combine mutually forming stable, branched or unbranched chains or rings. This ability of carbon
is responsible for the vast variety of organic compounds. C - C bonds form a skeleton of organic
molecules as shown in Fig. 2.1

a
H |
H-C—H
eee Ne |
| |
|
HHHHHH Bee 8 i | H
i v= c= H
H
Unbranched chain Ringed structure Branched chain

Fig. 2.1. : Unbranched and branched chains, and ring structure form and by C-C bonds.

(4) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Carbon combines commonly with H, O, N, P and S. Combinations with these and other elements
contribute to the large variety of organic compounds. Carbon and hydrogen bond (C-H bond) is the
potential source of chemical energy for cellular activities. Carbon-oxygen association in glycosidic
linkages provides stability to the complex carbohydrate molecules. Carbon combines with nitrogen
in amino acid linkages to form peptide bonds and forms proteins which are very important due to
their diversity in structure and functions.

Large organic molecules (macromolecules) such as cellulose, fats, proteins, etc. are generally
insoluble in water, hence they form structures of cells. They also serve as storage for smaller
molecules like glucose, which in turn are responsible for providing energy to the body.

Small molecules, such as glucose, amino acids, fatty acids etc. serve either as a source of energy,
or as subunits to build macromolecules. Some small molecules are so unstable that they are
immediately broken down to release energy e.g. ATP. Such substances serve as immediate source
of energy for cellular metabolism.


2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

IMPORTANCE OF WATER

Water is the medium of life. It is the most abundant compound in all organisms. It varies from 65
to 89 percent in different organisms. Human tissues contain about 20 per cent water in bone cells
and 85 percent in brain cells. Almost all reactions of a cell occur in the presence of water. It also
takes part in many biochemical reactions such as hydrolysis of macromolecules. It is also used as a
raw material in photosynthesis.

Solve. t properties

Due to its polarity, water is an excellent solvent for polar substances. lonic substances when dissolved
in water, dissociate into positive and negative ions. Non-ionic substances having charged groups in
their molecules are dispersed in water. When in solution, ions and molecules move randomly and
are in amore favourable state to react with other molecules and ions. It is because of this property
of water that almost all reactions in cells occur in aqueous media. In cells all chemical reactions are
catalyzed by enzymes which work in aqueous environment. Nonpolar organic molecules, such as
fats, are insoluble in water and help to maintain membranes which make compartments in the cell.

Heat capacity

Water has great ability of absorbing heat with minimum of change in its own temperature. The
specific heat capacity of water - the number of calories required to raise the temperature of 1g of
water from 15 to 16°C is 1.0. This is because much of the energy is used to break hydrogen bonds.
Water thus works as temperature stabilizer for organisms in the environment and hence protects
living material against sudden thermal changes.


2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Heat of vaporizatio.

Water absorbs much heat as it changes from liquid to gas. Heat of vaporization is expressed as
calories absorbed per gram vaporized. The specific heat of vaporization of water is 574 Kcal/kg,
which plays an important role in the regulation of heat produced by oxidation. It also provides
cooling effect to plants when water is transpired, or to animals when water is perspired. Evaporation
of only two ml out of one liter of water, lowers the temperature of the remaining 998 ml by 1°C.

Io. izatio. of water
The water molecules ionize to form H* and OH ions:

H,0 — H* + OH
This reaction is reversible but an equilibrium is maintained. At 25°C the concentration of each of
H* and OH ions in pure water is about 10’ mole/litre. The H* and OH ions affect, and take part in
many of the reactions that occur in cells.

Protectio.

Water is effective lubricant that provides protection against damage resulting from friction. For
example, tears protect the surface of eye from the rubbing of eyelids, water also forms a fluid
cushion around organs that helps to protect them from trauma.

CARBOHYDRATES

Carbohydrates occur abundantly in living organisms. They are found in all organisms and in almost
all parts of the cell. Cellulose of wood, cotton and paper, starches presentin cereals, root tubers, cane
Sugar and milk sugar are all examples of carbohydrates. Carbohydrates play both structural and
functional roles. Simple carbohydrates are the main source of energy in cells. Some carbohydrates
are the main constituents of cell walls in plants and micro-organisms.

The word carbohydrate literally means hydrated carbons. They are composed of carbon, hydrogen
and oxygen and the ratio of hydrogen and oxygen is the same as in water. Their general formula
is C (H,0 \y where(x) is the whole number from three to many thousands whereas y may be the
same or different whole number. Chemically, carbohydrates are defined as polyhydroxy aldehydes
or kentones, or complex substances which on hydrolysis yield polyhydroxy aldehyde or ketone
subunits. (Hydrolysis involves the break down of large molecules into smaller ones utilizing water

molecules).
@) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

The sources of carbohydrates are green plants. These are the primary products of photosynthesis.
Other compounds of plants are produced from carbohydrates by various chemical changes.

Carbohydrates in cell combine with proteins and lipids and the resultant compounds are called
glycoproteins and glycolipids, respectively. Glycoproteins and glycolipids have structural role in
the extracellular matrix of animals and bacterial cell wall. Both these conjugated molecules are
components of biological membranes.

Classification of Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates are also called ‘saccharides’ (derived from Greek word'‘sakcharon’ meaning sugar) and
are Classified into three groups: (i) Monosaccharides (ii) Oligosaccharides, and (iii) Polysaccharides.

Monosaccharides: These are simple sugars. They are sweet in taste, are easily soluble in water,
and cannot be hydrolysed into simpler sugars. Chemically they are either polyhydroxy aldehydes or
ketones. All carbon atoms in a monosaccharide except one, have a hydroxyl group. The remaining
carbon atom is either a part of an aldehyde group or a keto group. The sugar with aldehyde group
is called aldo-sugar; and with the keto group as keto-sugar. These are indicated in the case of two
trioses sketched below (Fig. 2.2).

CHO CH,OH
HCOH G=0
CH,OF buy 20H
Aldehyde form Keto form

Fig. 2.2: Structure of glyceraldehyde, a 3C Sugar (C,H,O,. The aldehyde form is glyceraldehyde, whereas ketonicform is dihydroxyacetone.

V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

In nature monosaccharides with 3 to 7 carbon atoms are found. They are called trioses (3C), tetroses
(4C), pentoses (5C), hexoses (6C), and heptoses (7C). They have general formula (CH,O)n. where n is
the whole number from three to seven thousands.

Two trioses mentioned above are, intermediates in respiration and photosynthesis. Tetroses are
rare in nature and occur in some bacteria. Pentoses and hexoses are most common. From the
biological point of view the most important hexose is glucose. It is an aldose sugar. Structure of
ribose and glucose is given below (Fig. 2.3).

CHO
Se HCOH
HCOH ,
HOCH
HCOH |
HCOH
‘iil HCOH
i CH,OH
Ribose Glucose
(A pentose sugar) ( A hexose sugar)

Fig. 2.3 Structure of Ribose and Glucose.

Most of the monosaccharides form a ring structure when in solution. For example ribose will form
a five cornered ring known as ribofuranose, whereas glucose will form six cornered ring known as
glucopyranose ( Fig. 2.4).

(@) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

HO— a a
r H1 ee
I\ olf |
— if
|
OH l |
H OH
(a) Ribose (b) Glucose
Ribofuranose (D-Ribose) Glucopyranose (D-glucose)

Fig. 2.4 Ribose and glucose form ring shaped structures.

In free state, glucose is present in all fruits, being abundant in grapes, figs, and dates. Our blood
normally contains 0.08% glucose. In combined form, it is found in many disaccharides and
polysaccharides. Starch, cellulose and glycogen yield glucose on complete hydrolysis. Glucose is
naturally produced in green plants which take carbon dioxide from the air and water from the soil
to synthesize glucose.

light energy
6CO, + 12H,0 — C,H,.O, + 60, + 6H,O

chlorophyll

As indicated in the equation, energy is consumed in this process which is provided by sunlight. This
is why the process is called Photosynthesis. It is noteworthy that for the synthesis of 10g of glucose
717.6 Kcal of solar energy is used. This energy is stored in the glucose molecules as chemical energy
and becomes available in all organisms when it is oxidized in the body.

Oligosaccharides: These are comparatively less sweet in taste, and less soluble in water.
On hydrolysis oligosaccharides yield from two to ten monosaccharides. The ones yielding two
monosaccharides are known as disaccharides, those yielding three are known as trisaccharides
and so on. The covalent bond between two monosaccharides is called glycosidic bond.

V: 1.1

Physiologically important disaccharides are maltose, sucrose, and lactose (see Fig. 2.5). Most familiar
disaccharide is sucrose (cane sugar) which on hydrolysis yields glucose and fructose, both of which

are reducing sugars. Its molecular formula is C,,H,,O.,. Its structural formula is given in Fig. 2.5.

5
ie. pi HOCH, H
H | HOCH, ae t
o 5
HO iC aiea o) & H
OH = “CH; a: ce
= oN CH ;OH
H Tie OH H bond
1:0] I
Two monosaccharides One diaccharide
Glucose — Furetose (1.2 glycosiedic linkage)

Fig. 2.5 A disaccharide. Note carefully the glycosidic linkage between the two monosaccharides.

Animation 2.5: Carbohydrates
Source and Credit:

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Polysaccharides: Polysaccharides are the most complex and the most abundant carbohydrates
in nature. They are usually branched and tasteless. They are formed by several monosaccharide
units linked by glycosidic bonds (Fig. 216). Polysaccharides have high molecular weights and are
only sparingly soluble in water. Some biologically important polysaccharides are starch, glycogen,
cellulose, dextrins, agar, pectin, and chitin.

Animation 2.6: Structural Features of Polysaccharides
Source and Credit: biologie.uni-hamburg

Starch: It is found in fruits, grains, seeds, and tubers. It is the main source of carbohydrates
for animals. On hydrolysis, it yields glucose molecules. Starches are of two types, amylose and
amylopectin. Amylose starches have unbranched chains of glucose and are soluble in hot water.
Amylopectin starches have branched chains and are insoluble in hot or cold water. Starches give

blue colour with iodine.

Animation 2.7: Starch

Source and Credit: dynamicscience

(12) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

e) St ee Se ere
om i ‘= a Oo ‘fe " j a oO \ a / _———
‘ / \ Oo \ Oo \y (3)
‘ » on : 7 } “ s/

oO oO 0 oO ~
J \ i a i) Sn ey.
AG ~~ 0 ~L \ Ye 0 ~~ / 0
o Oo o .6O o Oo
”~ > DX
“/ cl aN oO 5 , 5 —=© a { a —
ror '’1 “SS oo eee on)

Fig 2.6.: Polysaccharides are polymers of monosaccharides.

Glycogen: It is also called animal starch. It is the chief form of carbohydrate stored in animal
body. It is found abundantly in liver and muscles, though found in all animal cells. It is insoluble in
water, and gives red colour with iodine. It also yields glucose on hydrolysis.

Cellulose: It is the most abundant carbohydrate in nature. Cotton is the pure form of cellulose.
It is the main constituent of cell walls of plants and is highly insoluble in water. On hydrolysis it
also yields glucose molecules. It is not digested in the human digestive tract. In the herbivores, it
is digested because of micro-organisms (bacteria, yeasts, protozoa) in their digestive tract. These
micro-organisms secrete an enzyme called cellulase for its digestion. Cellulose gives no colour with
iodine.

(13) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

LIPIDS

The lipids are a heterogenous group of compounds related to fatty acids. They are insoluble in water
but soluble in organic solvents such as ether, alcohol, chloroform and benzene. Lipids include fats,
oils, waxes, cholesterol, and related compounds.

Lipids as hydrophobic compounds, are components of cellular membranes. Lipids are also used to
store energy. Because of higher proportion of C-H bonds and very low proportion of oxygen, lipids
store double the amount of energy as compared to the same amount of any carbohydrate. Some
lipids provide insulation against atmospheric heat and cold and also act as water proof material.
Waxes, in the exoskeleton of insects, and cutin, an additional protective layer on the cuticle of
epidermis of some plant organs e.g. leaves, fruits, seeds etc., are some of the main examples.

Lipids have been classified as acylglycerols, waxes, phospholipids, sphingolipids, glycolipids and
terpenoid lipids including carotenoids and steroids. The structure of some of these lipids is given
below.

Acylglycerols

Acylglycerols are composed of glycerol and fatty acids (Fig. 2.7). The most widely spread acyl glycerol
is triacyl glycerol, also called triglycerides or neutral lipids. Chemically, acylglycerols can be defined

as esters of fatty acids and alcohol. An ester is the compound produced as the result of a chemical
reaction of an alcohol with an acid and a water molecule is released as shown below:

C,H,OH + HOOCCH, — C,H,OCOCH, + H,0
alcohol acetic acid an ester
As indicated by dotted squares, OH is released from alcohol and H from an acid.

Hand OH combine and form awater molecule. Fatty acids are one of the most important components
of triglycerides.

V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

f
_HO-C—-H

= | 1
whew _HO-¢—-H

B Ester bond
+ Glycerol Triacylglycerol

i
O-C—H

Oc Ts
H

Three fatty
acids

Fig. 2.7: Triacylglycerol is composed of one glycerol and three fatty acid molecules.

Animation 2.8: Triglyceride
Source and Credit: i-biology

@)

O-C—H + (3H,0)

: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Fatty acids contain even numbers ( 2-30) of carbon atoms in straight chain attached with hydrogen
and having an acidic group COOH (carboxylic group). They may contain no double bond (saturated
fatty acids) or up to 6 double bonds (unsaturated fatty acids). In animals the fatty acids are straight
chains (Fig. 2.8.), while in plants these may be branched or ringed. Solubility of fatty acids in organic
solvents and their melting points increase with increasing number of carbon atoms in chain. Palmitic
acid (C,,) is much more soluble in organic solvent than butyric acid (C,). The melting point of palmitic
acid is 63.1°C as against -8°C for butyric acid.

CH:.COOH Acetic Acid (C:)
GH;. CH:-CH,. COOH Butyric Acid (C,)
GHs.CH>-CH».GH:.GH2.CH2.CH>.CH>.CH».CH)

GH». GH2.CH2.CH2.CH2.COOH Palmitic Acid (Cis)
GH. CH «GH» -CH2.CH2.CH2.CH2 .CH2. CH=CH.

CHb-GH -CHe .CH; .CH.CH2.GH».COOH Oleic Acid (C;.)

Fig. 2.8: Some fatty acids with carbon numbers 2-18 are shown. Oleic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid (note a double bond between
C, and C,,). Other fatty acids are saturated.

Fats containing unsaturated fatty acids are usually liquid at room temperature and are said to be
oils. Fats containing saturated fatty acids are solids. Animal fats are solid at room temperature,
whereas most of the plant fats are liquids. Fats and oils are lighter than water and have a specific
gravity of about 0.8. They are not crystalline but some can be crystallized under specific conditions.

Waxes

Waxes are widespread as protective coatings on fruits and leaves. Some insects also secrete wax.
Chemically, waxes are mixtures of long chain alkanes (with odd number of carbons atoms ranging
from C,,, to C,.) and alcohols, ketones and esters of long chain fatty acids. Waxes protect plants from
water loss and abrasive damage. They also provide water barrier for insects, birds and animals
such as sheep.

V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Phospholipids

Phospholipids are derivatives of phosphatidic acid (Fig.2.9.), which are composed of glycerol,
fatty acids and phosphoric acid. Nitrogenous bases such as choline, ethanolamine and serine
are important components of phospholipids. They are widespread in bacteria, animal and plant
cells and are frequently associated with membranes. Phosphatidylcholine is one of the common
phospholipids.

1CH,0.COR 1CH,0-COR ’ Polar (hydrophilic)
region- phosphate
containing region

2CH.O.COR” 2CH.O.COR”
| Wf | @
3 CH,.c9-P. OH 3CH>0.P.0.CH ,,CH »»N*(CH,) 4 Non-polar (hydrophobic)
fe 4 region- fatty acids
Phosphatidic Acid Phosphytidylcholine a
(Lecithin) Phospholipid molecule

Fig. 2.9.: Phosphatidic acid is composed of glycerol, 2 fatty acids (on Cl and C2), and a phosphoric acid on C3 of glycerol. In phospholipid
a nitrogenous base (e.g. choline) is attached to phosphoric acid in phosphatidic acid.

Terpenoids

Terpenoids are a very large and important group of compounds which are made up of simple
repeating units, isoprenoid units. This unit by condensation in different ways gives rise to Compounds
such as rubber, carotenoids, steroids, terpenes etc. Lipids constitute major source of energy, and
play an important role in the structure of membranes of the cell and of organelles found in the cell.
They also provide insulation, mechanical protection and protection from water loss and abrasive
damage.

PROTEINS

Proteins are the most abundant organic compounds to be found in cells and comprise over 50% of
their total dry weight. They are present in all types of cells and in all parts of the cell.

(17) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Proteins perform many functions. They build many structures of the cell. All enzymes are proteins
and in this way they control the whole metabolism of the cell. As hormones, proteins regulate
metabolic processes. Some proteins (e.g. hemoglobin) work as carriers and transport specific
substances such as oxygen, lipids, metal ions, etc. Some proteins called antibodies, defend the
body against pathogens. Blood clotting proteins prevent the loss of blood from the body after an
injury. Movement of organs and organisms, and movement of chromosomes during anaphase of
cell division, are caused by proteins.

Proteins are polymers of amino acids, the compounds containing carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and
hydrogen. The number of amino acids varies from a few to 3000 or even more in different proteins.

Amino acids: About 170 types of amino acids have
been found to occur in cells and tissues. Of these,
about 25 are constituents of proteins. Most of the
proteins are however, made of 20 types

of amino acids.

All the amino acids have an amino group (-NH,) and a
carboxyl group (-COOH) attached to the same carbon
atom, also known as alpha carbon. They have the

general formula as: Animation 2.9: Amino Acid

Source and Credit:

Amino group Carboxyl group

H.N—— C——COOH

Alpha carbon

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

R may be a hydrogen atom as in glycine, or CH, as in alanine, or any other group. So amino acids
mainly differ due to the type or nature of R group.

Amino acids are linked together to form polypeptides proteins. The amino group of one amino
acid may react with the carboxyl group of another releasing a molecule of water. For example,
glycine and alanine may combine as shown in Fig.2.10.

The linkage between the hydroxyl group of carboxyl group of one amino acid and the hydrogen of
amino group of another amino acid release H,0 and C - N link, to form a bond called peptide bond.
The resultant compound glycylalanine, has two amino acid subunits and is a dipeptide. A dipeptide
has an amino group at one end and a carboxyl group at the other end of the molecule. So both
reactive parts are again available for further peptide bonds to produce tripeptides, tetrapeptides,
and pentapeptides etc, leading to polypeptide chains.

Peptide bond
H HW Jo GH; Yo
N—C—e:. + N-¢—C ——
: | he é | ‘
nH H OH
Glycine Alanine Glycylalanine Water
(a dipeptide)
Fig. 2.10 Peptide linkage - formation of peptide bond
STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS

Each protein has specific properties which are determined by the number and the specific sequence
of amino acids in a molecule, and upon the shape which the molecule assumes as the chain folds
into its final, compact form. There are four levels of organization which are described below.

V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Primary structure: The primary structure comprises the number and sequence of amino acids
in a protein molecule. F. Sanger was the first scientist who determined the sequence of amino acids
in a protein molecule. After ten years of careful work, he concluded, that insulin is composed of 51
amino acids in two chains.

One of the chains had 21 amino acids and the other had 30 amino acids and they were held together
by disulphide bridges. Haemoglobin is composed of four chains, two alpha and two beta chains.
Each alpha chain contains 141 amino acids, while each beta chain contains 146 amino acids (Fig.
2.11). The size of a protein molecule is determined by the type of amino acids and the number of
amino acids comprising that particular protein molecule.

Haem unit
Globular
protein
subunit

Keratin fiber
(fibrous protein)

Haemoglobin
(globular protein)

Fig. 2.11. Polypeptide chains in keratin (fibrous protein ) and in haemoglobin (globular protein) are held together to form respective
functional proteins.

Now we know that there are over 10,000 proteins in the human body which are composed of
unique and specific arrangements of 20 types of amino acids. The sequence is determined by the
order of nucleotides in the DNA. The arrangement of amino acids in a protein molecule is highly
specific for its proper functioning. If any amino acid is not in its normal place, the protein fails to
carry on its normal function. The best example is the sickle cell hemoglobin of human beings. In this
case only one amino acid in each beta chain out of the 574 amino acids do not occupy the normal
place in the proteins (in fact this particular amino acid is replaced by some other amino acid), and
the hemoglobin fails to carry any or sufficient oxygen, hence leading to death of the patient.

V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Secondary structure: The polypeptide chains in a protein molecule usually do not lie flat. They
usually coil into a helix, or into some other regular configuration. One of the common secondary
structures is the a-helix. It involves a spiral formation of the basic polypeptide chain. The a-helix
is a very uniform geometric structure with 3.6 amino acids in each turn of the helix. The helical
structure is kept by the formation of hydrogen bonds among amino acid molecules in successive
turns of the spiral. B-pleated sheet is formed by folding back of the polypeptide.

Tertiary structure: Usually a polypeptide chain bends and folds upon itself forming a globular
Shape. This is the proteins’ tertiary conformation. It is maintained by three types of bonds, namely
ionic, hydrogen, and disulfide (-S-S-). For example, in aqueous environment the most stable tertiary
conformation is that in which hydrophobic amino acids are buried inside while the hydrophilic
amino acids are on the surface of the molecule.

Quaternary structure: In many highly complex proteins, polypeptide tertiary chains are
aggregated and held together by hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen and ionic bonds. This specific
arrangement is the quaternary structure. Haemoglobin, the oxygen carrying protein of red blood
cells, exhibits such a structure.

(abies ed ed Hahah iat

{a)Primary Structure

» per Te
a Al As Aa
— | A= AT a

D (c)Tertiary structure

(b)Secondary Structure

Daulhe
coiled

Fig 2.12 Three levels of protein structures compared with a telephone wire

(21) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Classification of proteins

Because of the complexity of structure and diversity in their function, it is very difficult to classify
proteins in a single well defined fashion. However, according to their structure, proteins are
classified as follows:

Fibrous proteins: They consist of molecules having one or more polypeptide chains in the form
of fibrils. Secondary structure is most important in them. They are insoluble in aqueous media. They
are non-crystalline and are elastic in nature. They perform structural roles in cells and organisms.
Examples are silk fiber (from silk worm, and spiders’ web) myosin (in muscle cells), fibrin (of blood
clot), and keratin (of nails and hair).

Globular proteins: These are spherical or ellipsoidal due to multiple folding of polypeptide
chains. Tertiary structure is most important in them. They are soluble in aqueous media such as salt
solution, solution of acids or bases, or aqueous alcohol. They can be crystallized. They disorganize
with changes in the physical and physiological environment. Examples are enzymes, antibodies,
hormones and hemoglobin.

NUCLEIC ACIDS (DNA AND RNA)

Nucleic acids were first isolated in 1869 by F. Miescher from the nuclei of pus cells. Due to their
isolation from nuclei and their acidic nature, they were named nucleic acids. Nucleic acids are of
two types, deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA and ribonucleic acid or RNA. DNA occurs in chromosomes,
in the nuclei of the cells and in much lesser amounts in mitochondria and chloroplasts. RNA is
present in the nucleolus, in the ribosomes, in the cytosol and in smaller amounts in other parts of
the cell.

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Adenine

al ae “

Pa H

H Nh = 4 ‘i
LS

—
ace

Phosphates

Ribose

Fig. 2.13. Structural formula of ATP (a nucleotide)

Nucleic acids are complex substances. They are polymers of units called nucleotides. DNA is made
up of deoxyribonucleotides, while RNA is composed of ribonucleotides. Each nucleotide is made
of three subunits, a 5-carbon monosaccharide (a pentose sugar), a nitrogen containing base, and
a phosphoric acid. Pentose sugar in ribonucleotide is ribose, while in deoxyribonucleotide it is
deoxyribose. Nitrogenous bases are of two types, single-ringed pyrimidines, and double-ringed
Purines. Pyrimidines are cytosine (abbreviated as C), thymine (abbreviated as T), and uracil
(abbreviated as U). Purines are adenine (abbreviated as A) and guanine (abbreviated as G). Phosphoric
acid (H,PO, ) has the ability to develop ester linkage with OH group of Pentose sugar. In a typical
nucleotide the nitrogenous base is attached to position 1 of pentose sugar, while phosphoric acid
is attached to carbon at position 5 of pentose sugar (Fig 2.13 ).

(23) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

High - energy bond

Adenosine monophosphate AMP
———— ooo

Adenosine diphosphate ADP
————

Adenosine triphosphate

Fig. 2.14: Components of ATP, a nucleotide.

The compound formed by combination of a base and a pentose sugar is called nucleoside. A
nucleoside and a phosphoric acid combine to form a nucleotide. Each nucleotide of RNA contains
ribose sugar, whereas sugar in each nucleotide of DNA is deoxyribose (one oxygen removed from
OH group at carbon number 2). ATP is also an important nucleotide used as an energy currency by
the cell (Fig.2.14.)

DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid)

DNAisthe heredity material. It controlsthe properties and potential activities of a cell. Itis made of four
kinds of nucleotides namely d-adenosine monophosphate (d-AMP), d-guanosine monophosphate
(d-GMP), d-cytidine monophosphate (d-CMP), and d-thymidine monophosphate (d-TMP). These
nucleotides are united with one another through phosphodiester linkages in a specific sequence to
form long chains known as polynucleotide chains (Fig.2.15). Two nucleotides join together to form
dinucleotide whereas three join together to form trinucleotide. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide,
abbreviated as NAD, is an example of dinucleotide. It is an important coenzyme in several oxidation-
reduction reactions in the cell.

V: 1.1

2. Bioloaical Molecules al aarn Duniah

Animation 2.10: DNA
Source and Credit: Mysciencebook


2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Nitrogenous Nucleosides Nucleotides (ribose + Nucleosides Nucleotides (deoxyribose
base (ribose + nitrogenous (deoxyribose + + nitrogenous base +
nitrogenous base+phosphoric nitrogenous phosphoric acid)
base) acid) base)
Adenine Adenosine AMP, ADP, ATP d-Adenosine dAMP, dADP, dATP
Uracil Uridine UMP, UDP, UTP
Guanine Guanosine GMP, GDP, GTP d-Guanosine dGMP, dGDP. dGTP
Cytosine Cytidine CMP, CDP, CTP d-Cytidine dCMP, dCDP, dCTP
Thymine d-Thymidine dTMP, dTDP. dTTP

In 1951 Erwin Chargaff provided data about the ratios of different bases present in this molecule.
This data suggested that adenine and thymine are equal in ratio and so are guanine and cytosine
as shown below in Table 2.2.

Table 2.2: Relative amounts of bases in DNA from various organisms (on percentage basis).

Source of DNA Adenine Guanine Thymine Cytosine

Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin used the technique of X-ray diffraction to determine the
structure of DNA. At the same time James D. Watson and Francis Crick built the scale model of DNA.
All the data thus obtained strongly suggested that DNA is made of two polynucleotide chains or
strands. The two strands are coiled round each other in the form of a double helix. Coiling of two
strands is opposite i.e. they are coiled antiparallel to each other. The two chains are held together
by weak bonds (hydrogen bonds). Adenine (A) is always opposite to thymine (T), and guanine (G)
and cytosine (C) are opposite to each other. There are two hydrogen bonds between A and T pair,
and three hydrogen bonds between G and C pair. The two strands are wound around each other
so that there are 10 base pairs in each turn of about 34 Angstrom units (one Angstrom = one

100-millionth of a centimeter) (Fig.2.15).
V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Sugar-
poze phosphate
Nitrogenous f P|
suger basepairs 3
phosphate--... — ;
is +2
3’ strand 2
strand 1
(a) (b)

Fig. 2.15 Model of DNA. Double helical structure of DNA proposed by Watson & Crick (b). A hypothetical sequence of nucleotides (on
the left side) shows hydrogen bonding between the complementary bases. Note a double boud between A and T, and triple bond
between C and G (a).

The amount of DNA is fixed for a particular species, as it depends upon the number of chromosomes.
The amount of DNA in germ cells (sperms and ova) is one half to that of somatic cells (Table 2.3).

(27) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Table 2.3 Amount of DNA/nucleus in different types of cells of a chicken (bird) and a carp
(fish).

Red Blood Cells 2.3 3.3
Liver cells 2.4 3.3
Kidney cells 2.4 3.3
Sperm cells 1.3 1.6

RNA (Ribonucleic Acid)

Like DNA, RNA is a polymer of ribonucleotides. The RNA molecules occur as single strand, which
may be folded back on itself, to give double helical characteristics. The nitrogenous bases form the
usual complementary pairing viz. cytosine (C) with guanine (G) and uracil (U) with adenine (A). RNA
is synthesized by DNA in a process known as transcription.

Types of RNA

Three main types of RNAs — messenger RNA (abbreviated as MRNA), transfer RNA (abbreviated as
tRNA), and ribosomal RNA (abbreviated as rRNA) are recognized. All these three types of RNAs are
synthesized from DNA in the nucleus and then are moved out in the cytoplasm to perform their
specific functions.

Messenger RNA (mRNA): As the name indicates it takes the genetic message from the nucleus
to the ribosomes in the cytoplasm to form particular proteins. Messenger RNA carries the genetic
information from DNA to ribosomes, where amino acids are arranged according to the information
in MRNA to form specific protein molecule. This type of RNA consists of a single strand of variable
length. Its length depends upon the size of the gene as well as the protein for which it is taking the
message. For example, for a protein molecule of 1,000 amino acids, MRNA will have the length of
3,000 nucleotides. mRNA is about 3 to 4% of the total RNA in the cell.

V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

Transfer RNA (tRNA): It comprises about 10 to 20% of the cellular RNA. Transfer RNA molecules
are small, each with a chain length of 75 to 90 nucleotides. It transfers amino acid molecules to the
site where peptide chains are being synthesized. There is one specific tRNA for each amino acid.
So the cell will have at least 20 kinds of tRNA molecules. Transfer RNA picks up amino acids and
transfers them to ribosomes, where they are linked to each other to form proteins.

Ribosomal RNA (rRNA): It is the major portion of RNA in the cell, and may be up to 80% of the
total RNA. It is strongly associated with the ribosomal protein where 40 to 50% of it is present. It
acts as a machinery for the synthesis of proteins. On the surface of the ribosome the MRNA and
tRNA molecules interact to translate the information from genes into a specific protein.


Animation 2.12: RNA

Source and Credit:


2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

CONJUGATED MOLECULES

Two different molecules, belonging to different categories, usually combine together to form
conjugated molecules. Carbohydrates may combine with proteins to form glycoprotein or with lipids
to form glycolipids. Most of the cellullar secretions are glycoprotein in nature. Both glycoproteins
and glycolipids are integral structural components of plasma membranes. Lipoprotein formed by
combination of lipids and proteins are basic structural framework of all types of membranes in the
cells.

Nucleic acids have special affinity for basic proteins. They are combined together to form
nucleoproteins. The nucleohistones are present in chromosomes. These conjugated proteins
are not only of structural, but also are of functional significance. They play an important role in
regulation of gene expression.

Animation 2.13: Conjugated Molecules

source and Credit:

(1) V: 1.1

2. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab

1. Fill in the blanks.
i. Thesum of all the chemical reactions taking place within a cell is called

li, _is the basic element of organic compounds.

iii. All the amino acids have an amino group and a carboxyl group attached to the same
CC‘ aCOM~zCW

IV. ____ is the most abundant carbohydrate in nature.

V. Adenine and guanine are double ringed bases and are called ____

2. Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘false’ and write the correct statement if it is
false.
i. _Asmall proportion of water molecules are in ionized form
li. The covalent bond among two monosaccharides is called a peptide bond.
iii. Glycogen is also called plant starch.
iv. Adenine is always opposite to guanine, cytosine and thymine are opposite to each other
in DNA molecule.
V. DNAmolecule is made of two polynucleotide strands

3. Short questions.
I. Name the carbohydrates suitable as food for man.
li. Why are fats considered as high energy compounds?
lil. What is the function of mRNA?

IV. What is the general formula for amino acids?
V. What is the percentage of water in brain cells of man?
4. Extensive questions.

L. Describe the importance of water for life.
li. Describe what do you know about polysaccharides.
lil. Write a short note on amino acids.

(32) V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

CHAPTER

Enzymes

3

Animation 3.1: Enzyme
Source &Credit:

cS V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

Enzymes are the most important group of proteins which are biologically active. They tremendously
increase the efficiency of a biochemical reaction and are specific for each type of reaction. Without
these enzymes the reaction would proceed at a very slow speed making life impossible.

Enzymes are composed of hundreds of amino acids joined together and coiled upon themselves
to form a globular structure. The catalytic activity is restricted to a small portion of the structure
known as the active site. The reactant called substrate is attached to the active site consisting of
only a few amino acids, while rest of the bulk of the amino acids maintains the globular structure
of the enzyme.

Some enzymes consist solely of proteins. Others also have a non-protein part known as a co-factor,
which is essential for the proper functioning of the enzymes. The cofactor usually acts as “bridge”
between the enzyme and its substrate, often it contributes directly to the chemical reactions which
bring about catalysis. Sometimes the co-factor provides a source of chemical energy, helping to
drive reactions which would otherwise be difficult or impossible. Some enzymes use metal ions as
co-factors like Mg**, Fe?*, Cu2*, Zn* etc. The detachable co-factor is known as an activator if it is an
inorganic ion (Fig. 3.1).

Fig. 3.1 Substrate molecules will not fit correctly at the active centre and there will be no catalytic action unless the
cofactor molecule is also present

Ifthe non-protein part is covalently bonded, itis known as a prosthetic group. If itis loosely attached
to the protein part, it is known as coenzyme. It is closely related to vitamins, which represent the
essential raw materials from which coenzymes are made. Only small quantities of vitamins are

@) V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

needed because, like enzymes, co-enzyme can be used again and again. An enzyme with its coenzyme,
or prosthetic group, removed is designated as apoenzyme. Adding the correct concentrated
coenzyme to the apoenzyme will restore enzyme activity. An activated enzyme consisting of
polypeptide chain and a cofactor is known as holoenzyme.

Many enzymes are simply dissolved in the cytoplasm. Other enzymes are tightly bound to certain
subcellular organelles. They are produced by living cells for use in or near the site of their production.
The enzymes important in photosynthesis are found in the chloroplasts and enzymes involved in
cellular respiration are found in the mitochondria. Some of the enzymes which are involved in the
synthesis of proteins are integral part of ribosomes.

CHARACTERISTICS OF ENZYMES

Enzymes, the biochemical catalysts possess the following important characteristics.
1. All enzymes are globular proteins.

2. They increase the rate of reaction without themselves being used up.

3. Their presence does not affect the nature or properties of end products.

4. Small amounts of an enzyme can accelerate chemical reactions.

G) V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

5. They are very specific in their action; asingle enzyme Some enzymes are potentially damaging
catalyzes only a single chemical reaction or a group if they are manufactured in their active

of related reactions. form. For example, pepsin is a powerful
6. They are sensitive to even a minor change in pH, protein - digesting enzyme and is quite
temperature and substrate concentration. capable of destroying cell's internal
7. Some enzymes require a co-factor for their proper structure and thus is produced in
functioning. inactive pepsinogen form by the cell. It
8. They lower the activation energy of the reactions. is converted in its active form only in the
digestive tract where it is required to be
MECHANISM OF ENZYME ACTION active.
(CATALYSIS)

An enzyme is a three dimensional globular protein that has specific chemical composition due to
its component amino acids and a specific shape. Every enzyme by virtue of its specificity recognizes
and reacts with a special chemical substance called substrate. Any enzyme, therefore, reacts only
with its specific substrate and transforms it into product(s). It is then released unaltered and thus
can be used again and again.

E + S — ES — E + P
Enzyme Substrate Enzyme Enzyme Product
substrate complex

V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

In certain cases enzymes act in a series of chemical reactions in a particular order to complete
a metabolic pathway such as respiration or photosynthesis. The successive enzymes containing
these reactions are normally present together in a precise order of reaction such that substrate
molecules can be literally handed on from one enzyme to another forming a enzyme to enzyme
chain. In this way, the products from one step in pathway are transferred to the enzyme catalyzing
the next step.

Feedback inhibition

Initial
substrate Intermediate substances

Enzyme Enzyme Enzyme
1 2 3

product

Precursor activation

Fig, 3.2 Enzyme to enzyme chain (association)

V: 1.1

An enzyme and its substrate react with each other through a definite charge-bearing site of an
enzyme called active site. The charge and shape of the active site is formed by some amino acids
present in the polypeptide chain of the active site of the enzyme. These amino acids are brought
closer and are arranged in a specific way by coiling and folding of the polypeptide chain within the
globular symmetry of the enzyme (Fig. 3.3).

Substrate => Substrate Product » Product
molecules =, molecules
binding with formed
active site —, Active
TY site
Enzyme

nzyme-substrate
complex

Enzyme can be reused

Fig. 3.3 Diagrammatic representation of an enzyme-substrate reaction (Lock and Key
Model)

The active site of the enzyme is made up of two definite regions i.e the binding site and the catalytic
site. The binding site helps the enzyme in the recognition and binding of a proper substrate to
produce an ES complex. This reaction activates the catalytic site. Activated catalytic site catalyzes
the transformation of the substrate into product(s). Thus the enzyme after catalysis detaches itself
from the products unchanged. Enzyme requires aqueous medium for its activity.

Most enzymes do not float about in a kind
of cytoplasmic soup’ but are attached
to membrane systems inside the cell
in specific and orderly arrangements.
Mitochondria and chloroplasts are good
examples of this.

Emil Fischer (1890) proposed a Lock and Key model to
visualize substrate and enzyme interaction. According
to this model, as one specific key can open only a
specific lock, in the same manner a specific enzyme can
transform only one substrate into products(s).

According to Lock and Key Model the active site is a rigid structure. There is no modification or
flexibility in the active site before, during or after the enzyme action and it is used only as a template.
Later studies did not support this model in all reactions.

(6) V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

On the basis of new evidences Koshland (1959) proposed its modified form. This is known as Induce
Fit Model.

He argued that when a substrate combines with an enzyme, it induces changes in the enzyme
structure. The change in structure enables the enzyme to perform its catalytic activity more
effectively.

FACTORS AFFECTING THE RATE OF ENZYME ACTION

The functional specificity of every enzyme is the consequence of its specific chemistry and
configuration. Any factor that can alter the chemistry and shape of an enzyme can affect its rate of
catalysis. Some of the important factors that can affect the rate of enzyme action are: concentration
of enzyme, concentration of substrate, temperature, and pH of the medium.

1. Enzyme Concentration

The rate of reaction depends directly on the amount of enzyme present at a specific time at
unlimited substrate concentration. If the amount of enzyme is increased by two fold the reaction
rate is doubled.

By increasing the enzyme molecules an increase in the number of active sites takes place. More
active sites will convert the substrate molecules into product(s), in the given period of time. After a
certain limiting concentration, the rate of reaction will no longer depend upon this increase.

2. Substrate Concentration
At low concentration of substrate the reaction rate is directly proportional to the substrate available.

If the enzyme concentration is kept constant and the amount of substrate is increased, a point is
reached when a further increase in the substrate does not increase the rate of the reaction any
more (Fig.3.4). This is because at high substrate level all the active sites of the enzyme are occupied
and further increase in the substrate does not increase the reaction rate.

7) V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

Maximum rate for enzyme
at concentrations A and B

Active sites
almost all occupied.
Enzyme is saturated

Reaction rate

Active sites
still available

Substrate concentration

Fig. 3.4.1 fleet o f substrate c oncentration on the rate of an enzyme catalyzed reaction.

3. Temperature

The rate of enzyme controlled reaction may increase with increase in temperature but up to a
certain limit. All enzymes can work at their maximum rate at a specific temperature called as
optimum temperature. For enzymes of human body 37°C is the optimum temperature (Fig.3.5).

Heat provides activation energy and therefore, chemical reactions are accelerated at high
temperatures. Heat also supplies kinetic energy to the reacting molecules, causing them to move
rapidly. Thus the reactants move more quickly and chances of their collision with each other are
increased. However, further increase in heat energy also increases the vibrations of atoms which
make up the enzyme molecule. If the vibrations become too violent, globular structure essential for
enzyme activity is lost and the enzyme is said to be denatured.

V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

Normal curve for
inorganic reactions

i)
ec Rate doubles
= for each 10°C Denaturation
= rise in temperatue of enzyme
|
vit
or
Optimum
temperature
10 20 30 37 50 60
Temperture/'C
fig.3.5. Effect of temperature on the rate of an enzyme catalyzed reaction
4. pH Value

Every enzyme functions most effectively over a narrow range of pH known as the optimum pH as
shown in Table 4.1.

A slight change in pH can change the ionization of the amino acids at the active site. Moreover,
it may affect the ionization of the substrates. Under these changed conditions enzyme activity is
either retarded or blocked completely.

Extreme changes in pH cause the bonds inthe enzyme to break, resulting inthe enzyme denaturation.

(@) V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
Table 4.1 Optimum pH values for some enzymes

Enzyme

Pepsin

Sucrase
Enterokinase
Salivary amylase
Catalase
Chymotrypsin
Pancreatic lipase
Arginase

I. hibitors

An inhibitor is a chemical substance which can react (in place of substrate) with the enzyme but
is not transformed into product(s) and thus blocks the active site temporarily or permanently, for
example poisons, like cyanide;, antibiotics, anti-metabolites and some drugs.

Inhibitors can be divided into two types: (i) Irreversible (ii) Reversible

Irreversible Inhibitors

They check the reaction rate by occupying the active sites or destroying the globular structure.
They occupy the active sites by forming covalent bonds or they may physically block the active sites.
Reversible Inhibitors

They form weak linkages with the enzyme. Their effect can be neutralized completely or partly by
an increase in the concentration of the substrate.

They are further divided into two major types: A. Competitive B. Non-competitive

A. Competitive Inhibitors

Because of the structural similarity with the substrate they may be selected by the binding sites,
but are not able to activate the catalytic sites. Thus product(s) are not formed (Fig.3.6).

V: 1.1

3. Enzymes

B. Non-competitive Inhibitors

eLearn.Punjab

They form enzyme inhibitor complex at a point other than the active site. They alter the structure
of the enzyme in such a way that even if genuine substrate binds the active site, catalysis fails to

take place.

Substrare
succinic
acid

Enzyme
succinic (a)
dehydrogenase

Competitive inhibitor
malonic
acid

pa j No reaction
Gec- Sr possible
t i e ed - enzyme
blocked

oO aieltieieed T
og HR oO (b)
Fumaric acid

Fig .3.6 Mechanism of competitive inhibition.(a) Formation of enzyme-substrate complex
resulting in the formation of product. (b) Inhibitor. malonic acid does not fit the active site,

hence no product is formed

Animated 3.5: Non-competitive Inhibitors
Source and Credit: academic.brooklyn

(11) V: 1.1

3. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab

Q.1. Fill in the blank.
(i) Enzymes are composed of hundreds of_
(ii) Some enzymes consist of anon-protein part knownasa_
(iii) Many enzymes require non-protein component called __ for their proper

functioning.

(iv) Enzymes are highly in nature.

(v) The enzymes which carry out the synthesis of ___ __ are integral parts of
ribosomes.

Q.2. Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘false’ and write the correct statement if it
is false.
(i) The enzymes important in photosynthesis are found in tire mitochondria
(ii) Large amounts-of an enzyme can accelerate chemical reactions.
(iii) Calvin Malvin proposed Lock and Key model for enzyme action.
(iv) The active site of an enzyme is composed of four regions.
(v) Structure of an enzyme has no specific importance.

Q.3. Short Questions
(i) List two conditions that destroy enzymatic activity by disrupting bonds between
the atoms in an enzyme.
(ii) How do low and high temperature, affect an enzyme activity?
(iii) What is a prosthetic group?
(iv) Define inhibitors of enzyme.
(v) How does an enzyme accelerate a metabolic reaction?

Q.4. Extensive questions.
1. Describe in detail the mechanism of enzyme action.
2. Give the effect of pH and temperature on the efficiency of an enzyme action.
3. Write anote on inhibitors of enzymes.
4, What is the importance of enzymes in life?

(12) V: 1.1

CHAPTER

The Cell

4

Animation 4.1: Plant cell

Source & Credit: Wiki,gcc

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

The cell can be defined as the structural and functional unit of life. It is the smallest unit that can
carry out all activities of life. Cells are building blocks of complex multicellular organisms.

EMERGENCE AND IMPLICATION OF CELL THEORY

Study of cell (cell biology) began with the discovery of cell by Robert Hooke (1665), who reported
his work in his famous publication Micrographia. He prepared and studied thin sections of cork (of
dead plant material) under his self-made compound microscope.

He observed that the cork is composed of minute honey comb like compartments which he termed
as Cells (Fig.4.1). According to Hooke, cell is an empty space bounded by thick walls. Very little
information was added to this idea in the following century. The work again started in the beginning
of 19th century.

Lorenz Oken (1805) a German scientist , believed that
“all living beings originate from or consist of vesicles or
cells”. Jean Baptist de-Lamarck (1809) expressed similar
idea and said “no body can have life if its constituent
parts are not cellular tissue or are not formed by
cellular tissue”.

In 1831 Robert Brown reported the presence of nucleus
in the cell. Due to this discovery Hooke’s idea about
the cell as an empty space was changed. It was later
established that cell is not an empty space. A German
zoologist Theodor Schwann (1839) and a German
botanist Schleiden (1838), working independently,
came out with a theory called the Cell Theory.

They found that the cell consisted of 3 basic parts, viz

nucleus, the fluid (cytoplasm) surrounding the nucleus, and an outer thin covering or membrane
(plasma membrane). The cell wall, they said, was an additional structure, present only in plant
cell. Keeping in view this definition of cell, the cells could be observed in plant as well as in animal;
according to cell theory, all living organisms are composed of cells and cell products.

@) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

The cell theory is one of the most fundamental generalizations in Biology. It has wide ranging effect
in all fields of biological sciences. After the cell theory was presented, many details of cell were
studied, as a result of which the cell theory was extended.

Rudolph Virchow (1855), a German physician, hypothesized that new cells were formed only
by the division of previously existing living cells (to put it in Virchow’s words : “omnis cellula e
cellula”). It was contrary to the idea of “abiogenesis” (living things arise soontaneously from non-
living things), one of the prevailing but controversial ideas about origin of life, at that time. Louis
Pasteur (1862), one of the greatest scientists of all times, supplied experimental proof for Virchow’s
hypothesis by demonstrating that microorganisms (bacteria) could be formed only from existing
bacteria. Original cell theory and Virchow’s hypothesis gave us the basis for working definition of
living things: living things are chemical organizations composed of cells and capable of reproducing
themselves’. August Weismann (1880) said ‘all presently living cells have a common origin because
they have basic similarities in structure and molecules etc. It was shown that there are fundamental
similarities in the chemical composition, metabolic activities and structure, although they differ in
many respects. Cells are basically similar but extraordinarily versatile. Cell is not only the structural
but also the functional unit of living organisms. So cell theory is a very important unifying concept

The human naked eye can differentiate between two points, which are at least 1.0 mm apart.
This is known as resolution of the eye. This resolution can be increased with the aid of lenses. In
a typical compound microscope the resolution is 2.0 um, which is about 500X that of naked eye.
A compound microscope is a typical laboratory microscope with at least different magnification
powers. The typical ocular lenses could be 5X and 10X, but others also exist. Likewise different
types of objective lenses viz. 20X, 40X, 100X etc exist. The magnification power of microscope is
determined by multiplying X values of ocular lense and X value of objective lense. Therefore, a

microscope with 10X ocular lens and 40X objective lense will have (10X40 = 400X) 400X magnifying
power. The resolution will, however, remain the same, which is 500X that of the naked eye. The
source of illumination in such microscopes is visible light. In electron microscope the source
of illumination is a beam of electrons and the resolution of microscope ranges between 2-4
Angstrom, which make it 500X greater than that of the compound microscope and 250,000X
greater than that of the naked eye. This means that two points which are 2-4 Angstrom apart
can be differentiated with the help of electron microscope. The revelation of complexity of
structure of various cellular organelles is closely linked with the development of microscopy
and improvement in the resolution power of the microscope.

G) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

The salient features of Cell Theory in its present form are:

(1) All organisms are composed of one or more cells.

(2) All cells arise from pre-existing cells.

(3) Cell is the basic structural as well as functional unit for all organisms.

Cell as a unit of structure and function

A cell is a unit of structure and function in living organisms. In multicellular organisms there is a
division of labour among cells. Different cells are specialized for different functions. The function
of the organism as a whole is the result of the sum of activities and interactions of different cells
and of different components of the cell. In animals e.g., muscle cells contract and relax, nerve
cells transmit impulses, gland cells secrete, red blood cells carry oxygen and some stomach cells
secrete gastric juice. Similarly in plants xylem cells conduct water and mineral salts from soil to
the aerial parts of the plant. Phloem cells translocate food, sclerenchymatous cells give support to
the plants, chlorenchymatous cells carry out photosynthesis, parenchymatous cells store surplus
food and meristematic cells produce new cells for growth and development of the plant. As they
perform different functions they show great variation in shape and size. Despite the structural and
functional diversity, the plant cells as well as animal cells have a common plan of organization.

STRUCTURE OF A GENERALIZED CELL

Structure of a cell can be studied under light microscope as well as electron microscope. The modem
technology enables us to isolate various components of cells including its organelles by a process
of cell fractionation and study their structure and function in detail. During cell fractionation the
tissues are homogenized or disrupted with special instruments and the various parts of the cells
are separated by density gradient centrifugation. This separation is achieved by spinning the
homogenized or disrupted cells in a special medium in a centrifuge at medium speed. The various
cellular parts separate out in different layers depending upon their size and weight, and density of
the medium. Some cellular components require very high speeds for separation from other parts
of the cells. This is achieved through ultracentrifugation.

(4) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

A cell consists of the following basic components:
1. Plasma membrane, also a cell wall in plant cell.
2. Cytoplasm, containing cell organelles.

3. Nucleus, with nuclear or chromatin material.

In the traditional system of classification all organisms are divided into plants and animals. The
cells of plants and animals can be distinguished by the presence or absence of cell wall. Cells of

Smooth
Rough endoplasmic Nucleus

reticulum

Flagellum
Not in most |
plant cells | RYaOnOMe
Centriole

‘Ribosomes
Peroxisome

“Golgi
i apparatus
Microtubule a ™ 2
Cytoskeleton . Intermediate agma membrane
filament

| Microfilament — Mitochondrion

Fig.4.2: Electron microscope structure of a animal cell.

G) V: 1.1

Image 4.2: Structure of Animal Cell
Source and Credit:

Nucleolus
5 th Ni Rough
ee ; Nucleus endoplasmic
endoplasmic : f cli esi
reticulum

NG

Chloroplast
Meat in Cell Wall ;
animal Central
cells Vacuobe

Microfilament
Cytoskeleto
fe “f Microtubule

Fig. 4.3 Electron microscopic structure of a plant cell

Image 4.3: Animal Plant Cell

Source and Credit: thegreatestgarden

animals and plants absence of cell wall. Cells of animals and plants are complex and have a
distinct nucleus (chromatin material is bounded by a membrane) and are called Eukaryotic. On the
other hand, the primitive type of cells, such as bacteria, lack a definite nucleus and are said to be
Prokaryotic. In Prokaryotes the nuclear material is directly submerged in the cytoplasm and is not
separated from it by membranes.

The eukaryotic cells vary greatly in size. They could be as big as an Ostrich’s egg. Most of the cells
are microscopic and are not visible to the naked eye. Their size is measured in micrometer (um).
One um is 0.000,001 meter or 1x 10° of a metre.

The use of modern technology has made it possible to study the following components of the cell
in detail (Fig.4.2 and 4.3).

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Plasma Membra. e

Plasma membrane or cell membrane is the outer most boundary of the cell. However, in most plant
cells, it is covered by a cell wall. Cell membrane is chemically composed of lipids and proteins; 60
- 80% are proteins, while 20-40% are lipids. In addition there is a small quantity of carbohydrates.

Many biologists contributed to establish the structural organization of cell membrane. It was
proposed earlier that cell membrane is composed of lipid bilayer sandwiched between inner and
outer layers of protein (Fig.4.4). This, basic structure is called the unit membrane and is presentin all
the cellular organelles. The modem technology has revealed that lipid bilayers are not sandwiched
between two protein layers.

The protein layers are not continuous and are not confined to the surface of the membrane but
are embedded in lipid layers in a mosaic manner (Fig.4.5). This discovery led to the proposal of
Fluid Mosaic Model. This model at present is the most accepted one. Cell membrane also contains
charged pores through which movement of materials takes place, both by active and passive
transport.

Globular
protein

Hydrophilic
zone

Hydrophobic
zone

Hydrophilic

ZONE

Fig: 4.4. Unit membrane

V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

pe
Filaments of Cholesterol /
cytoskeleton

Peripheral integral Phospholipid
protein protein CYTOPLASM

Fig. 4.5. Fluid Mosaic Model

Transport of materials is one of the vital roles it plays for the cell. It offers a barrier between the
cell contents and their environment, allowing only selective substances to pass through it, thus it
is known as differentially permeable or selectively permeable membrane. The substances which
are lipid soluble cross it more easily than others, therefore, it regulates the flow of materials and
ions to maintain a definite gradient. Many small gas molecules, water, glucose etc. being neutral can
easily cross while ions, being charged particles, have some difficulty in crossing. Many substances
which are not needed, constantly enter the cell by passive transport, others are taken up against
the concentration gradient (they move from the area of low concentration to the area of high
concentration). This uphill movement of materials requires energy and is termed as active transport.
The energy used for this movement is provided by ATP.

In many animal cells, the cell membrane helps to take in materials by infolding in the form of
vacuoles. This type of intake is termed as endocytosis which can be either phagocytosis (to engulf

(@) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

solid particles) or pinocytosis (to take in liquid material). In neurons (nerve cells) the cell membrane
transmits nerve impulses from one part of the body to the other to keep coordination.

Cell Wall

The outer most boundary in most ofthe plant cells is cell wall. The cell wall of plant cell is different from
that of prokaryotes, both in structure and chemical composition. It is secreted by the protoplasm
of the cell. Its thickness varies in different cells of the plant. It is composed of three main layers:
primary wall, secondary wall and the middle lamella. The middle lamella is first to be formed in
between the primary walls of the neighbouring cells. The primary wall is composed of cellulose
and some deposition of pectin and hemicelluloses. Cellulose molecules are arranged in a criss
cross arrangement (Fig.4.6). The primary wall is a true wall and develops in newly growing cells. The
secondary wall is formed on its inner surface and is comparatively thick and rigid. Chemically it is
composed of inorganic salts, silica, waxes, cutin lignin etc. Prokaryotic cell wall lacks cellulose; its
strengthening material is peptidoglycan or murein. Fungal cell wall contains chitin.

aif : ht Z _— ok
es ee | 5

i Pa i a
eh

—_ 1 Ad fa

Fig.4.6. Secret of the strength of plant structure is revealed by electron microscope photographs of the cell walls. The cellulose fibers
are arranged in layers, with the fibres of each layer at right angle to those of other layers.

V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Cell wall is very important. It provides a definite shape to the cell and keeps it rigid. It does not act
as a barrier to the materials passing through it.

Cytoplasm

The living contents of the eukaryotic cell are divided into nucleus and the cytoplasm, the two
collectively form protoplasm. Cytoplasm consists of an aqueous ground substance containing a
variety of cell organelles and other inclusions such as insoluble wastes and storage products. The
soluble part of the cytoplasm is called cytosol. It forms the ground substance of the cytoplasm.
Chemically it is about 90% water. It forms a solution containing all the fundamental molecules of
life. In the cytosol, small molecules and ions may form true solutions, and some large molecules
form colloidal solutions. Colloidal solution may be a sol (non-viscous) or a gel (viscous). Peripheral
parts of the cell are often like a gel.

The most important function of the cytoplasm is to act as a store house of vital chemicals. It is also
a site for certain metabolic processes such as glycolysis.

In living cells the cytoplasm contains several cell organelles such as endoplasmic reticulum,
mitochondria, Golgi complex, nucleus, plastids, ribosomes, lysosomes and centriole. The free
floating cell organelles e.g. mitochondria move about in cytoplasm due to cytoplasmic streaming
movements. This is an active mass movement of cytoplasm.

(11) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Endoplasmic Reticulum

Under an electron microscope a network of channels is seen extending throughout the cytoplasm.
These channels are often continuous with plasma membrane and also appear to be in contact
with the nuclear membrane. This entire system of channels is the Endoplasmic Reticulum. These
membranes vary widely in appearance from cell to cell. The material present in these channels is
separated from the cytoplasmic materials by the spherical or tubular membranes, called cisternae.

There are two morphological forms of endoplasmic reticulum; a rough form with attached
ribosomes and a smooth form without ribosomes. The rough surfaced endoplasmic reticulum (RER)
is involved in the synthesis of proteins.

After synthesis the proteins are either

stored in the cytoplasm or exported

out of the cell through these channels.

The smooth surfaced endoplasmic

reticulum (SER) helps in metabolism

of a number of different types of

molecules particularly lipids. They also

help to detoxify the harmful drugs.

In some cells SER is responsible for

transmission of impulses, e.g. muscle

cells, nerve cells. In addition, SER also

plays an important role in the transport

of materials from one part of the cell to

the other. Endoplasmic reticulum also

provides mechanical support to the cell

So that its shape is maintained.

Animation 4.3: Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum
Source and Credit:

(12) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Nuclear Nuclear pore
envelope S/

Cisternal
space

Cisternae
Ribosomes <<

Smooth ER

Fig. 4.7: Rough endoplasmic reticulum is marked by the presence of ribosomes attached to the membranes of endoplasmic reticulum.
Proteins synthesized on ribosomes are pushed into channels of endoplasmic reticulum, from where they are transported to Golgi
Apparatus, on their way out of the cell.

Ribosomes

Cell contains many tiny granular structures known as ribosomes. Palade (1955) was the first person
to study them. Eukaryotic ribosomes are composed of an almost equal amount of RNA and protein,
hence they are ribonucleo-proteins particles. The RNA present in ribosome is called ribosomal
RNA. Ribosomes exist in two forms; either freely dispersed in cytoplasm or attached with RER as
tiny granules. Each eukaryotic ribosome consists of two sub-units. The larger subunit sediments
at 60S (S= Svedberg unit used in ultracentrifugation), while smaller subunit sediments at 40S. Two
Subunits on attachment with each other form 80S particle. This attachment is controlled by the
presence of Mg** ions. The ribosomes are attached to messenger RNA through small ribosomal
Subunit. A group of ribosomes attached to MRNA is known as polysome (Fig. 4.8).

(13) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Animation 4.4: Ribosomes
Source and Credit: Nature

Completed

Growing olypeptide
Q polypeptide (or

p

ribosomal

subunits A
eae

Fig. 4.8 mRNA attached to ribosomes forming polysomes.

New ribosomes are assembled in the nucleolus of the nucleus from where they are transported to
the cytoplasm via the pores in nuclear membrane. The factory of ribosome is the nucleolus, while

that of protein synthesis is the ribosomes.
V: 1.1

Animation 4.5: Ribosomes
Source and Credit:

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Golgi Apparatus

Golgi apparatus was discovered by Golgi in 1898. This apparatus, which was found virtually in all
eukaryotic cells, consists of stacks of flattened, membrane bound sacs, called cisternae. These
cisternae together with associated vesicles are called Golgi complex. It is a complex system of
interconnected tubules around the central stacks. Cisternae stacks are continuously formed by
fusion of vesicles, which are probably derived by the budding of SER. Their outer convex surface is
the forming face, while the inner concave surface is the maturing face. The cisternae break up into
vesicles from the latter. The whole stack consists of a number of cisternae thought to be moving
from the outer to the inner face.

Forming face of

eee “‘golgl apparatus
New vesicle

forming

Transport

Oe versicle from the
Maturation face of = golgi apparatus

golgi apparatus

Fig. 4.9 Golgi Complex

V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Transport vesicle Transport vesicle
from ER from galgi
Rough ER
Plasma
ve a meine rane
—_

ee S =.

- =m

Nucleus
Lysosome
Golgi apparatus
Smooth ER

Fig. 4.10. :This figure shows relationship of endoplasmic reticulum with Golgi Apparatus, lysosome and plasma membrane. Golgi
Apparatus has two ends, Forming Face and Maturation Face. Blebs from tips of SER fuse with Golgi Apparatus cisternae at Forming
Face, whereas secretory granules.

(transport vesicles) are pinched off at the Maturation Face of Golgi Apparatus. The arrows show the
direction of flow of protein product systhesized on ribosomes. These proteins are converted into
glycoproteins in the Golgi Apparatus.

Golgi complex is concerned with cell secretions. Secretions are products formed within the cell on
ribosomes and then passed to the outside through endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi Apparatus. The
secretions are converted into finished product and are packed inside membrane, before export. For
example in mammals, the pancreas secretes granules containing enzymes that help in digestion.
The Golgi complex has a role in formation of these granules. The proteins or enzymes which have
to be transported out of the cell pass through the Golgi Apparatus. The most important function of
this apparatus is to modify the proteins and lipids by adding carbohydrates and converting them
into glycoproteins or glycolipids.

(17) V: 1.1

Animation 4.6: Golgi Apparatus
Source and Credit:
Lysosomes

Lysosomes are cytoplasmic organelles and are different from others due to their morphology.
These were isolated as a separate component for the first time by De Duve (1949). Lysosomes (Lyso
= splitting; soma = body) are found in most eukaryotic cells. Any foreign object that gains entry into
the cell is immediately engulfed by the lysosome and is completely broken into simple digestible
pieces. The process is known as phagocytosis (eating process of a cell). They are most abundant in
those animal cells which exhibit phagocytic activity. They are bounded by a single membrane and
are simple sacs rich in acid phosphatase and several other hydrolytic enzymes. These enzymes are
synthesized on RER and are further processed in the Golgi apparatus. The processed enzymes are
budded off as Golgi vesicles and are called as primary lysosomes (Fig.4.11). Lysosomes contain
those enzymes which can digest the phagocytosed food particles.

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

es

ace

Secondaity hyaosome — Digestion
Plvema ey Sa
ment anve A

Food vacuole |

j |
) 4 Ws. i 2 A ‘Paar
(| Enguifment =F yy engulfing
of panicle A Lysosome c=" damaged
| ‘_ at i organelle
a i /
_¥ tot !
ea al |
h—/ doe “ 5D = Golgi uh
F, Transport vesicle re = appara
@ {containing in = :
- ; active hydrolytic EF
— enzymes) S® ‘ Aue iT
i | i
— | a
i Py = tae
Sa Rough ER

Fig. 4.17: Lysosomes protect the cells from invading organisms or any other foreign object, (food) which are engulfed in the cell as
phagocytic vacuoles. These fuse with primary lysosomes to form digestive vacuole (secondary lysosome) in which various lysosomal
enzymes digest various.

components of the vacuole. Some times, under abnormal circumstances, e.g. starvation, or as a
normal physiological process the parts of the cell are engulfed by primary lysosomes and digested
to generate energy. The lysosomes which eat parts of their own cell are known as autophagosomes.
The digestive vacuoles and autophagosomes are also known as Secondary Lysosomes.

They are also involved in the autophagy (self eating). During this process some old, worn out parts
of cell, such as old mitochondria are digested. In this way, materials of cell may be recycled and cell
may be renewed. Their enzymes can also result in degeneration of cell, as may occur during some
developmental processes. Lysosomes also release enzymes for extra cellular digestion.

Several congenital diseases have been found to be due to accumulation within the cell of substances
such as glycogen or various glycolipids. These are also called storage diseases and are produced
by a mutation that effect one of the lysosomal enzymes involved in the catabolism of a certain
substance. For example, in glycogenosis type II disease, the liver and muscle appear filled with
glycogen within membrane bound organelles. In this disease, an enzyme that degrades glycogen to
glucose, is absent. About twenty such diseases are known these days, which are because of absence
of a particular enzyme. For example Tay-Sach’s disease is because of absence of an enzyme that is
involved in the catabolism of lipids. Accumulation of lipids in brain cells lead to mental retardation

and even death.
V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Animation 4.7: Lysosomes
Source and Credit:


4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Peroxisome

De-Duve and coworkers isolated in 1965 particles from liver cells and other tissues which were
enriched with some oxidative enzymes, such as peroxidase, catalase, glycolic acid oxidase and some
other enzymes. The name peroxisome was applied because this organelle is specifically involved in
the formation and decomposition of hydrogen peroxide in the cell.

These are single membrane enclosed cytoplasmic organelles found both in animal and plant
cells. These are characterised by containing H,0, - producing oxidases and catalase. They are
approximately 0.5 um in diameter. They have also been found in protozoa, yeast and many cell
types of higher plants.

Glyoxysomes

Plants contain an organelle, which in addition to glycolic acid oxidase and catalase also possess a
number of enzymes that are not found in animal cells. These organelles, called glyoxysomes are
most abundant in plant seedlings, which rely upon stored fatty acids to provide them with the
energy and material to begin the formation of a new plant. One of the primary activities in these
germinating seedlings is the conversion of stored fatty acids to carbohydrates. This is achieved
through a cycle, glyoxylate cycle, the enzymes of which are located in the glyoxysomes.

In plants, peroxisomes play important role in both catabolic and anabolic pathways. In seeds rich
in lipids such as castor bean and soyabeans, glyoxysomes are the sites for breakdown of fatty acids
to succinate.

This organelle is present only during a short period in the germination of the lipid-rich seed and is
absent in lipid-poor seed such as the pea.

Vacuoles

Although vacuoles are present both in animal and plant cells, they are particularly large and
abundant in plant cells often occupying a major portion of the cell volume and forcing the remaining
intracellular structures into a thin peripheral layer. These vacuoles are bounded by a single

(21) V: 1.1

membrane and are formed by the coalescence of smaller vacuoles during the plant's growth and
development. Vacuoles serve to expand the plant cell without diluting its cytoplasm and also
function as sites for the storage of water and cell products or metabolic intermediates.

The plant vacuole is the major contributor to the turgor that provides support for the individual
plant cell and contributes to the rigidity of the leaves and younger parts of the plants.

Animation 4.8: Vacuole

Source and Credit:

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Cytoskeleton

Cytosol contains cytoskeletal fabric formed of microtubules, microfilaments and intermediate
filaments. The main proteins that are present in cytoskeleton are tubulin (in microtubules),
actin, myosin, tropomyosin and others which are also found in muscles. Several cell organelles
are derived from special assemblies of microtubules, for examples cilia, flagella, basal bodies and
centrioles. The movement of cyclosis and amoeboid movements are because of microfilaments,
whereas intermediate filaments are involved in determination of cell shape and integration of
cellular compartments (Fig. 4.2).

Microtubules are long, unbranched, slender tubulin protein structures. One very important
function of mirotubules is their role in the assembly and disassembly of the spindle structure during
mitosis.

Microfilaments are considerably more slender cylindres made up of contractile actin protein,
linked to the inner face of the plasma membrane. They are involved in internal cell motion.

Intermediate filaments have diameter in between those of microtubules & microfilaments. They
play role in the maintenance of cell shape.

Centriole

Animal cells, and cells of some microorganisms and lower
plants contain two centrioles located near the exterior
surface of the nucleus. In cross section each centriole
consists of a cylindrical array of nine microtubules.
However, each of the nine microtubules is further
composed of three tubules (Fig. 4.12). The two centrioles
are usually placed at right angle to each other. Just
before a cell divides, its centrioles duplicate and one pair
migrates to the opposite side of the nucleus. The spindle
then forms between them. They are absent in higher
plants. Centrioles play important role in the location of
furrowing during cell division, and in the formation of

cilia.
(23) V: 1.1


4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 4.12. Centrioles are made up of nine microtubule triplets.

Mitochondria

Mitochondria are very important organelles of eukaryotic cells, because they are involved in the
manufacture and supply of energy to the cell. They are also known as powerhouses of the cell
(Fig. 4.13). Under compound microscope they appear to be vesicles, rods or filaments. Under an
electron microscope, they show complex morphology. Although their number, shape and internal
structure vary widely, a mitochondrion is bound by two membranes, the outer membrane is
smooth, while the inner membrane forms infoldings into the inner chamber called mitochondrial
matrix. These infolds are called cristae. The mitochondrial membranes are similar in structure to
other cell membranes. Detailed studies have shown that mitochondria also contain DNA as well as
ribosomes.

The presence of ribosomes and DNA indicates that some proteins are synthesized in them. It is a
self replicating organelle.

The inner surface of cristae in the mitochondrial matrix has small knob like structures known as F,
particles (Fig. 4.13). Mitochondrial matrix contains in it a large number of enzymes, coenzymes and
organic and inorganic salts which help in several vital metabolic processes like Kreb’s cycle, aerobic

V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

respiration, fatty acid metabolism etc. As a result of these metabolic processes the energy extracted
from the organic food is transformed into energy rich compound ATP (adenosine triphosphate),
and the ATP then provides energy to the cell on demand. The size and number of mitochondria
varies and depends on the physiological activity of the cell.

Outer membrane
Outer compartment
[space between outer and
inner membrane)

Matrix
{inner compartment]

Fig.4.13. : Diagrammatic representation of a mitochondrion cut longitudinally. The main features are shown. A crista is made of
lipoprotein membrane containing different enzymes as well as F1 Particles embedded in it. After a special processing the inner

mitochondrial membrane is ruptured and the F1 particles come out on the surface.

(25) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Mitochondria extract energy from different components of food and convert it in the form of ATP.
This energy is used for various cellular activities. The spent energy, which is in the form of ADP is
regenerated by the mitochondria into ATP. Mitochondria is therefore described as power house of
the cell.

Plastids

Membrane bound, mostly pigment containing bodies present in the cells are called Plastids. Plastidr
are present in plant cells only.
There are three main types of plastids.

1. Chloroplasts

In photosynthetic plant cells, there are membrane bound structures containing a green pigment,
called chloroplasts. The green pigment is an organic compound, chlorophyll, which helps the cell to
absorb light energy and utilize it to manufacture food. Chlorophyll molecule resembles the haem
group of haemoglobin, a protein used in the transport of oxygen. The main difference between
these two molecules is that chlorophyll has Mg** while haem has Fe** as the central atom.

V: 1.1

Chloroplasts vary in their shape and size with a diameter of about 4-6 um. Under light microscope
they appear to be heterogeneous structures with small granules known as grana embedded in the
matrix. Under electron microscope, a chloroplast shows three main components, the envelope,
the stroma and the thylakoid. The envelope is formed by a double membrane, while stroma covers
most of the volume of the chloroplast. Stroma is a fluid which surrounds the thylakoids. It contains
proteins, some ribosomes and a small circular DNA. It is in this part of the chloroplast where CO,
is fixed to manufacture sugars. Some proteins are also synthesized in this part. Thylakoids are the
flattened vesicles which arrange themselves to form grana and intergrana. A granum appears to be
a pile of thylakoids stacked on each other like coins. On an average, there are 50 or more thylakoids
piled to form one granum. On the layers of thylakoids chlorophyll molecules are arranged and that
is why granum appears to be green (Fig.4.14). Each granum is interconnected with others by the
non-green part called intergranum. Membranes of the grana are sites where sun light energy is
trapped and where ATP is formed. Chloroplasts are self-replicating organelles.

2. Chromoplasts
They impart colours to the plants other than green. They are present in the petals of the flower and
in the ripened fruit. They help in pollination and dispersal of seeds.

3. Leucoplasts
They are colourless. They are triangular, tubular or of some other shape. They are found in the
underground parts of the plant and store food.

Outer
membrence

Inner
membrance

ain: eo: 7 Pel

Granum

(Stack of
thylakoids)

Thylakoid Thylakoid lumen

Fig. 4.14: Diagram of chloroplast showing the main structural components.

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

NUCLEUS

Presence of cell nucleus was reported in 1831 by Robert Brown. Its early discovery was undoubtedly
due to its prominence in many cells, where it stands out as slightly darker than the surrounding
cytoplasm. It controls the life and activities of the cell. In animal cells, it generally occupies the
central space, while in the case of plant cells it is pushed towards periphery due to the presence
of a large vacuole. Nucleus may be irregular or spherical in shape. Generally, the cells have one
nucleus and are called mononucleate. On the other hand, the cells with two nuclei are binucleate
and with more than two as multinucleate.

Nucleus is only visible when the cell is in non-dividing stage. It contains chromatin network and
soluble sap called nucleoplasm. In dividing cells, the nucleus disappears and the chromatin material
in it is replaced by chromosomes. The heredity material is in the form of chromosomes, which
controls all the activities of the cell. DNA, RNA and proteins including enzymes form the chemical
composition of the nucleus. Nucleus consists of nuclear membrane, nucleoli, nucleoplasm and
chromosomes.

Nuclear Membrane

Nucleus is surrounded by a nuclear membrane which separates the nuclear material from the
cytoplasm. The nuclear membrane is actually a nuclear envelope composed of two membranes.
The outer membrane is at places continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum, while the inner
membrane encloses the nuclear content. The outer and the inner membranes are continuous at
certain points resulting in the formation of pores, the nuclear pores. The nuclear pores allow the
exchange of materials between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. The number of nuclear pores is
highly variable. The undifferentiated cells (such as eggs) have numerous pores (about 30,000 per
nucleus), whereas differentiated cells such as erythrbcytes have only 3 or 4 pores/nucleus. Each
pore has a definite structure which controls the traffic of substances passing through them (figs.
4.7, 4.10 and 4.16).

Nucleolus

It is a darkly stained body within the nucleus, and is without any membranous boundary to separate
it from the rest of the nuclear material. There may be one or more nucleoli in the nucleus. The
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is synthesized and stored in the nucleolus. It is composed of two regions,
the peripheral granular area composed of precursors of ribosomal subunits and the central fibrill

V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

area consisting of large molecular weight RNA and rDNA. It is the nucleolus where ribosomes are
assembled and are then exported to the cytoplasm via nuclear pores.

V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Chromosomes

Nucleus is often deeply stained with basic dyes because of the chromatin material. During cell
division chromatin material is converted into darkly stained thread like structures known are
chromosomes. Under a compound microscope, chromosomes appear to be made of arms and
centromeres. Centromere is the place on the chromosome where spindle fibres are attached during
cell division. Each chromosome consists of two identical chromatids at the beginning of cell division
(chromatid is exact replica of the chromosome) which are held together at centromere (Fig.4.15).

A chromosome is composed of DNA and proteins. All the information necessary to control the
activities of the cell is located on the chromosomes in the form of genes, which are transferred
from one generation to the other. The number of chromosomes in all individuals of the same
species remains constant generation after generation. In man, each cell contains 46 chromosomes,
frog cell has 26 and chimpanzee has 48 chromosomes. There are 8 chromosoms in the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster, 16 chromosomes in onion, 48 in potato, and 14 in garden pea. The number
of chromosomes in normal body cells is diploid (2n), whereas haploid chromosome number (n)
is present in germ cells, e.g human sperms and eggs have 23, while those of Drosophila have 4
chromosomes.

Centromere region

Kinetochore

Fig.4.15. : Structure of chromosome and its shape.

V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Nucleolus Nuclear

— Chromatin

network

ar ‘Nucleoplasm

Fig. 4.16 Structure of nucleus

PROKARYOTIC AND EUKARYOTIC CELL

Biologists have divided cells into two types: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. The differences between
these two types of cells are mainly based upon the structure of their nuclei. Eukaryotes have a
very well defined nucleus, in which nuclear material (chromosomes or DNA) is enclosed in double
nuclear membrane. In prokaryotic cells, however the genetic material (DNA) is without any nuclear
membrane covering and is directly submerged in the cytoplasm. Organisms possessing prokaryotic
cells are called Prokaryotes and those possessing eukaryotic cells are called Eukaryotes. Prokaryotes
include bacteria and blue green algae. Eukaryotes include all other unicellular or multicellular
organisms such as animals, plants, fungi and protista.

Diagrams of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are given in Fig 4.2, 4.3, and 4.17. Prokaryotic cells

generally lack many of the membrane bounded structures found in eukaryotic cells. For example,
mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, chloroplasts and Golgi apparatus are absent in prokaryotic

(1) V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

cells. Since there is no nuclear membrane, a prokaryotic cell has no distinct nucleus and its DNA
molecule is directly suspended in cytoplasm. Prokaryotes have small sized ribosomes 70S compared
to eukaryotes 80S. In prokaryotes mitosis is missing and the cell divides by binary fission. Because
of their simpler structure, it was widely accepted for a long time that prokaryotic cells represent a
more primitive stage of evolution than eukaryotic cells. Perhaps the most distinctive feature of
the prokaryotic cell is its cell wall, composed of polysaccharide chains bound covalently to shorter
chains of amino acids forming peptidoglycan or murein. The entire cell wall is often regarded as a
single huge molecule or molecular complex called sacculus The cell wall of plants is generally made
up of cellulose and is differently structured than that of a bacterium.

plasma membrane
plasmid rT
cell wall P

4

nucleoid (DNA) capsule

ribosomes

flagellum

cytoplasm

Fig. 4-17. Generalized Prokaryotic cell.

(32) V: 1.1

Animation 4.14: Prokaryote vs. Eukaryote
Source and Credit:

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Q.1.

Q.2.

Q.3.

Fill in the blanks:

(i)
(ii)
(ili)

(iv)
(v)

In eukaryotic cell chromatin material is bounded b y --------------

A group of ribosomes attached to MRNA is known as —------------
wannnnnnnn=-=- is the place on chromosomes where spindle fibres are attached
during cell division.

The endoplasmic reticulum with attached ribosomes is known as ------------
The soluble part of the cytoplasm is called.

Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘false’ and write the correct statement if it
is false.

(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

(v)

Cell membrane is present in all eukaryotic cells.

Chloroplast and mitochondria do not have hereditary material.

Centriole is involved in cell secretions.

Sometimes many ribosomes get attached to the same stretch of MRNA forming a
structure called the cytosome.

Mitochondria are very important organelles of the eukaryotic cells.

Short Questions.

Describe various movements involved in the transport of materials across the cell
membrane.

State various structural modifications in a cell involved in secretions.

List the processes blocked by mitochondrial failure in a cell.

What will happen if a chromosome loses its centromere?

How does autophagy help in converting a tadpole larva into an adult amphibian?
Is there any similarity between bacterial and plant cell wall?

V: 1.1

4. The Cell eLearn.Punjab

Q.4. Extensive Questions.
(i) Compare structure and function of chloroplasts and mitochondria.
(ii) State ‘Cell Theory’ and discuss its emergence.
(iii) Write notes on:
(a) Cytoskeleton (b) Peroxisomes & Glyoxysomes
(v) What might happen if some lysosomal enzymes are absent?

Explain with examples.

(35) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

CHAPTER

Variety of Life

Animation 5: Virus

hyfiles

aS V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

Over one and a half million species of animals and over a half million species of plants are known.
To deal with such a large collection of dissimilar forms, certainly we need some system by which
species can be classified in a reasonable way. Many types of classifications are possible. We could,
for example, classify flowering plants according to their colour, height, or any other character. This
type of classification is not meaningful since it does not provide any information about the basic
differences and similarities among different individuals.

All organisms are related to one another at some point in their evolutionary histories. However,
some organisms are more closely related than others. Sparrows are more closely related to pigeons
than either to the insects. Classification is based on relationship amongstindividuals, thatis, similarity
in form or structure. Biologists have classified all living things into groups showing similarities,
based upon homologies, comparative biochemistry, cytology and genetics. Large groups are divided
into smaller groups upto species level. “A species is a group of natural population which can
interbreed freely among themselves and produce fertile offsprings, but are reproductively
isolated from all other such groups in nature”. However “interbreeding” cannot be used as
a criterion for species recognition among predominantly asexually reproducing organisms. Each
Species possessed its own distinct structural, ecological and behavioral characteristics, hence
species are independent evolutionary units. Different species do not exchange genes between
them. Since long the living things are divided in two kingdoms: plants and animals. Next each
kingdom is divided into smaller groups called phyla (also divisions for plants, algae and fungi).

A phylum, in turn, is divided into classes, classes into orders, and an order into families. A family
contains related genera, and a genus is composed of one or more species. Species is the basic
unit of classification. Conversely speaking, the organisms are grouped into larger, more inclusive
categories (taxa), each category is more general than the one below it and has emergent properties.
The taxonomic categories from species to kingdom form a hierarchy as described in the classification
of corn.

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

Biological classification of Corn, Zea mays

KIMNZOOM......:cccesccecscecssecesseccssneeceseeeesseessns Plantae

DiViSION (PAYIUM).........cesccestecsteessteeeenees Anthophyta (Tracheophyta)
CIASS woo eeeeecssceestecseeeceteeeesecseaeeceseeessaeeseas Angiospermae

OLD oe eeeeesecesceseeeescecsseceeeeeeeeeaeeesaeenaees Poales

FAMILY ......eescceescecssccessseceseeceseeecssecessteeeenaes Poaceae

GENUS oo eeeeeeseeeeesseeeceseeeeeesseeeseesaeeeenees Zea

SPECIES 0... ceeeececcesssececssneecessseeecesaeeeesseeeeess mays

Members of a lower category resemble one another more than do the members of a higher taxon.

NOMENCLATURE

From the earliest times plants and animals have been given common names by the people. Since
no system was used in choosing common names, in many cases, various regions had their own
names for the same plant or animal . Take ‘Onion’ for example; its common urdu name is ‘Piyaz’ but
in different regions of Pakistan it is also known as ‘ganda’ or ‘bassal’ or ‘vassal’. In different countries
it would have another set of names. Similarly ‘amaltas’, ‘argvad’, ‘gurmala’, ‘golden shower’, purging
cassia’ are common names for the same plant. Thus the same plant may have different names. In
some cases, a single name refers to several different plants or animals. What is ‘blue bell’? Dozen of
plants with bell shaped flowers are called ‘blue bells’. Similarly the word ‘black bird’ would mean a
crow as well as a raven.common names have no scientific basis. To a biologist, a fish is a vertebrate
animal with a backbone, fins and gills. But ‘silver fish’ is an insect, and a ‘cray fish’, ‘jelly fish’ and
‘starfish’ do not fit the biologist’s definition of a fish.

Common names had long caused confusion. During the 18 century, Carlous Linnaeus (1707-1778),
a Swedish botanist, devised a system for naming and classifying all the organisms known to him.
His system is used today internationally. He discarded the common names of plants and gave
each one a scientific name. He took the scientific name from Latin word. Linnaeus publishes the
list of names of plants in 1753. The scientific name of each plant had two parts. Usually, the name
referred to some characteristics of the organisms or the person who collected it. His system spread
rapidly and became so popular that he used it later on in naming animals and published his list in

1758. Many of his names are in use today.
G) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

Linnaeus's system of giving each species a scientific name comprising two words is known as
binomial nomenclature. The first name refers to the genus (p1. genera) and is called generic name
and always begins with a capital letter. The specific name follows the generic name and begins with
small letter. Scientific name for onion is Allium cepa, for amaltas Cassia fistula and for man Homo
sapiens. Botanical name for potato is Solanum tuberosum and for brinjal Solanum melangena. The
same generic name for potato and brinjal reflects close relationship between theses two-species.
Every specie has only one scientific name the world over. Initially the classification was based on
the appearance or morphology of plants and animals but with advancement in the knowledge
of cytology, physiology, genetics and molecular biology the classification of organism has been
modified.

TWO TO FIVE KINGDOM CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS

Different classification systems recognize two to six kingdoms. For centuries , the living organisms
have been classified into two kingdoms, plants and animals. Plants can prepare their own food
from simple inorganic material and store energy (autotrophs), while animals can not synthesize
their own food from simple inorganic material and depend for their food either on autotrophs
or on decaying organic matter (heterotrophs). Bacteria were included in plants. Many biologists
found this system satisfactory, while others found it unworkable’ for many unicellular organisms
like Euglena that have both plant like (presence of chlorophyll) and animal like (lack of cell wall)
characters and also because it ignores the differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
In 1866, Ernst Hackel proposed a third kingdom protista to accommodate Euglena like organisms
and bacteria. In 1937, E-Chatton suggested differentiating terms procariotique (from Greek pro,
meaning before, and karyon, meaning nucleus) used to describe bacteria and blue-green algae,
and the term eu-cariotique (from Greek eu, mean true) to describe animal and plant cells. Some
biologists also disagree about the classification of fungi, such as bread mold, yeast and mushrooms,
which resemble plants in many ways but are not autotrophs. Fungi are special forms of heterotrophs
that obtain energy and structural material by breaking down (decomposing) and absorbing food
substances from the surroundings, and possess chitin as a major structural component in their cell
walls.

A relatively recent system of classification, the five kingdom system, was proposed by Robert
Whittaker (1969). This system of classification shown in Fig 5.1 is based on three different levels of
cellular organization associated with three principal modes of nutrition- photosynthesis,

(4) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

absorption and ingestion. The five kingdoms proposed (i) the prokaryotic unicellular organisms
(Monera) such as bacteria, (ii) the eukaryotic predominantly unicellular organisms (Protista) such
as Euglena and Amoeba, (ili) the eukaryotic multicellular autotrophs (Plantae), (iv) the eukaryotic
multicellular reducers (Fungi) for example mushrooms and (v) the eukaryotic multicellular
consumers (Animalia). Plants are autotrophic in nutritional mode, making their own food by
photosynthesis such as mosses, ferns, flowering plants. Fungi are heterotrophic organisms that
are absorptive in their nutritional mode. Most fungi are decomposers that live on organic material,
secrete digestive enzymes and absorb small organic molecules which are produced by digestion.
Animals live mostly by ingesting food and digesting it within specialized cavities. They lack cellulose
and show movements for example birds and reptiles. In five kingdom classification, all eukaryotes
that did not fit the definition of plants, fungi or animalia were included in Protista. Most Protists are
unicellular forms, but this kingdom also includes relatively simple multicellular organisms that are
believed to be direct descendants of unicellular protists.

Lynn Margulis and Karlene Schwartz (1988) modified five kingdom classification of Whittaker by
considering cellular organization , mode of nutrition, cytology, genetic and organelles of symbiotic
origin (mitochondria , chloroplast). These five kingdoms are Prokaryotae (Monera), Protoctista
(Protists), Plantae, Animalia and Fungi (Fig 5.1).

Fungi

Animalia

protoctista(Protista]

Prokaryotae(Monera)

Fig 5.1 Relationship of Five kingdom

G) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

Piantae
(Photosynthesis) Animalia
Fungi (ingestion)
Gymnosperms (absorption)
oh a Basidiomycetes Vertebrates
Urochordates
Ferns Ascomycetes
Echinoderms
Arthropods
 Mosses,liverworts
Mollusks
Nematodes
Brown
algae Coelenterates
Green Sponges
7 ie Slime
molds
\ Yeasts pr
. \. Diatoms ;
. . e Helizoans
\ s Cilliat
™ + ates
a" @

Dinoflagellantes:

Purple bacteria Archaeobacteria
r

Other

eubacteria
Ancestral

Monera or prokaryotes prokaryot

Prokaryotes Single-cell(Eukaryotes)

Fig. 5.2 Five kingdom classification by Whittaker

(6) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

VIRUSES

About a century ago at the time of Louis Pasteur (1822-1895) and Robert Koch (1843-1910), the
word “virus” was generally referred to as a poison associated with disease and death. The present
notion of virus is entirely different. Now viruses are recognized as particles of nucleic acid often with
a protein coat. They replicate in living cells and cause many diseases such as influenza, hepatitis,
Small pox and AIDS. In this section the focus is on the properiies of viruses and life cycle of bacterial
viruses, also known as bacteriophages. Some diseases caused by viruses shall also be discussed in
this section. The branch which deals with the study of viruses is known as virology.

The word virus is derived from Latin word venome meaning poisonous fluid. It can be defined as
non cellular infectious entities which contain either RNA or DNA, normally encased in proteinaceous
coat, and reproduce only in living cells. Viruses utilize the biosynthetic machinery of the host for its
own synthesis and then transfer themselves efficiently to other cells.

Some viral diseases have been known for centuries. In fact, the first infectious disease against
which effective method of prevention was developed was a viral disease. In 1796, Edward Jenner
first vaccinated an 8 years old boy with material removed from cowpox lesion on the hand of
milkmaid. After six weeks the boy was inoculated with pus from a small pox victim, but he did
not develop the disease. Later, Jenner used material for vaccination from cowpox lesions and
successfully vaccinated 23 persons. As the material he used was obtained from cow (latin vacca),
latter the term vaccination was used by Louis Pasteur for inoculation against disease.

In 1884, one of Pasteur’s associates, Charles Chamberland, found that bacteria can not pass through
porcelain filters, while agent responsible for rabies (a disease which is transferred to human by bites
of rabid dogs, foxes, cats, bats and other animals) can pass through these filters. As in those days
the word virus was loosely used to describe any toxic substance that caused disease, those unseen
filterable agents of disease were described as filterable viruses. In 1892, lvanowski discovered that
the agent which caused tobacco mosaic disease was filterable. He obtained bacteria free filtrate
from ground up infected plants and placed it on healthy leaves of tobacco. He observed that filtrate
produced the disease in healthy plants. After that, presence of similar filter-passing, ultramicroscopic
agents was seen in the victims of many diseases, including foot and mouth disease (1898) and

yellow fever (1901).
@) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life

eLearn.Punjab

The filterable agents were first purified in 1935, when
Stanley was successful in crystallizing the tobacco mosaic
virus. Chemical analysis of these particles showed
that they contained only nucleic acid and protein. This
suggested that, unlike other forms, viruses are of simple
chemical composition.

Animation 5.1: Virus
Source and Credit: geocities

V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
Characteristics

Viruses are extremely small infectious agents, which can only be seen under an electron microscope.
They range in size from 250 nanometer (nm) of poxviruses to the 20 nm of parvoviruses. They are
10 to 1000 times smaller than most bacteria, so they can pass through the pores of filter, from
which bacteria cannot pass. Viruses cannot be grown on artificial media. They can reproduce only
in animal and plant cells or in microorganisms, where they reproduce by replication (a process by
which many copies or replicas of virus are formed). Thus the viruses are obligate intracellular
parasites. Viruses lack metabolic machinery for the synthesis of their own nucleic acid and protein.
They depend on the host cell to carry out these vital functions. During reproduction in the host
cells, viruses may cause disease. All viruses are generally resistant to broad range of available
antibiotics such as penicillin, streptomycin and others.

Structure

The complete, mature and infectious particle is known as virion. The virions are composed of
a central core of nucleic acid, either DNA or RNA, which is also known as the genome and is
surrounded by a protein coat, the capsid. Capsid gives definite shape to virion. Capsid is made up
of protein subunits known as capsomeres. The number
of capsomeres is characteristics of a particular virus.
For example 162 capsomeres are present in the capsid
of herpes virus and 252 in the capsid of adenovirus
which cause some common colds. In some animal viruses
the nucleocapsid (nucleic acid and capsid) is covered
by another membrane derived from the host cell, the
envelope. Non enveloped viruses are known as naked
virions. Animal and plant viruses may be polyhedron
(having many sides), helical (Spiral), enveloped or complex.

Bacterio-phages occur in two structural forms having cubical or helical symmetry. In general
appearance cubical phages are regular solid or icosahedral (having 20 faces), and helical phages
are rod shaped. Many phages consist of head and tail. In those cases heads are polyhedral but
tails are rod shaped. Morphology of some viruses and bacteriophages has been shown in Fig 5.3.

(@) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

oe (b) Paramyxovirus (C)Herpesvirus (d) Orf virus
en (mumps)
i a
— i 7
= : ©)
. Thonn

(ec) Rhabdovirus (gq) Fiexuous-

(f) T-even coliphage _ tailed phage

B

(j)polyomavirus (k) Picomavirus

(i)Influenza virus

(l) Tubulovirus

Fig. 5.3 Different types of viruses

Life Cycle of Bacteriophages

Earlier researches on bacteriphages were mainly on limited number of phages that infect Escherichia
coli. Of these the best known phages are T phages (T for type).

Among T phages, the T, and T, phages are mainly used in phage studies. The overall structure of
T, studied with electron microscopy, resembles that of tadpole, consisting of head and tail (Fig
5.4). The head is an elongated pyramidal (having two triangular structures with common base),
hexagonal , prism -shaped structure, to which straight tail is attached. Within the head double
stranded DNA molecule is present. The structure of phage tail is more complex than head. A layer
of distinct protein forms the inner tube or core, which is enclosed in sheath made up of another
type of protein. On one side of sheath is collar and on other side is end plate. To end plate six tail

V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

Capsid hea Nucleic acid

___—— Sheath
ow
\
ue M cnaae \
ibers ‘
‘ \
4 \ %

Base plate \
5

Fig. 5.4 A Bacteriophage

fibers are attached, which are the structures for attachment. The volume of the phage is about
1/1000 of the host.

The bacteriophage replicates only inside the bacterial cell. The first step in the replication of a
bacteriophage is its attachment (adsorption) to host cell at receptor site on the cell wall of
bacterium. During attachment, week chemical union between virion and receptor site takes place.
In the next step, penetration, the tail releases the enzyme lysozyme to dissolve a portion of the
bacterial cell wall. The tail sheath contracts and tail core is forced into the cell through cell wall and
cell membrane. The virus injects its DNA into the cell just as the syringe is used to inject the vaccine.
The protein coat, which forms the phage head and tail structure of virus remains outside the cell
(Fig 5.5). Many animal viruses, however enter the host cell as a whole.

Immediately after entering the host cell , the viral nucleic acid takes the control of the host's
biosynthetic machinery and induces the host cell to synthesize necessary viral components (DNA,
proteins), and starts multiplying. About 25 minutes after initial infection, approximately 200 new

(11) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

bacteriophages are formed, bacterial cell bursts, i.e., it undergoes lysis. Newly formed phages are
released to infect the bacteria and another cycle, the lytic cycle begins (Fig. 5.6). The phage which
causes lysis of the host cell is known as lytic or virulent phage.

li

. ‘ . GnewWa won
Landing Attachment Tall contiaclion . DNA injection
and unplugging

Fig 5.5 A phage injecting its DNA in to host

Animation 5.2: Viruses
Source and Credit: geocities.ws

(12) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life

Video 5.3: Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER),Ribosomes
Source and Credit: Sabaq

eLearn.Punjab

: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

eee cade Collars, sheaths, and base
= \z rf. a é
with DNA plates have been attached to

heads. Tall fiber are added last.

5. RELEASE
Bacterial cell lyses,
phages are released

Empty phage
heads and pieces
of phage DNA

*
SYNTHESIS
The phage DNA 1& 2 ADSORPTION AND
direct the cell's PENTRATION
matabolism to Phage is adsorbed
produce viral jo to receptor site on
components- bacterial cell wall,

Phage DNA inserts itself 44 inject its DNA,

hage DNA. Induction ’ as a prophage into
Re yal Prophage forms. * bacterial chromosome.

Binary fission is '
completed; each Phage is replicated along
cell has the with the bacterial DNA
phage DNA before the binary fission

LYSOGENIC CYCLE

copies of

incorporated ¢
to bacterial

DNA,
«
Indefinite cell
division

Fig. 5.6 Replication of a bacteriophage. After adsorption and penetration, the virus DNA undergoes prophage formation (1) In the
lysogenic cycle, phages can exist harmlessly as a prophage with in the host cell for long periods of time. Each ti.ne the bacterial
chromosome is replicated, the prophage also is replicated, and hence all daughter bacterial cell are “infected”! with the prophage.
Induction involves either a spontaneous or environmentally induced excision of the prophage from the bacterial chromosome. (2) A
typical lytic cycle, involves synthesis and maturation of phage and new phages are released.

All infections of bacterial cells by phages do not result in lysis. In some cases viral DNA, instead of
taking over the control of host's machinery, becomes incorporated into the bacterial chromosome.
Phage in this state is called prophage and this process is known as lysogeny. In this condition
the bacterium continues to live and reproduce normally. Viral DNA being the part of bacterial
chromosome passes to each daughter cell in all successive generations. Some times, however, the
viral DNA gets detached from the host's chromosome and lytic cycle starts. This process is called
induction. Lysogenic bacteria are resistant to infection by the same or related phages. The phage
which causes lysogeny is called temperate (lysogenic) phage.

V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

Classification of Viruses

Virus morphology and nucleic acid properties are most important for classifying plant, animal and
bacterial viruses. The genetic material may be DNA or RNA naked, enveloped or complex. On the
basis of morphology viruses are classified into rod shaped (T.M.V), spherical (poliovirus) and tadpole
like bacteriophage viruses etc. Fig. 3.5 and 5.4.

Some Viral Diseases

There are many diseases which are caused by viruses. Only those are being mentioned here which
have been or are common in Pakistan.

Small pox: Smallpox, which is caused by pox viruses (the DNA enveloped virus) is an ancient disease
that is known to have occurred as epidemic in China as early as the twelfth century B.C. Until the
early twentieth century , small pox was a common disease throughout the world. In small pox,
raised fluid-filled vesicles are formed on the body which become pustules later on and form pitted
scars, the pocks. By 1950's immunization and other control measures had largely decreased the
danger, but it is still present in the third world countries where many people are affected. In 1980,
it was declared by World Health Organization that small pox has been eradicated from the world.

Herpes simplex: Herpes virus (DNA virus) is responsible for this disease. It is naturally occurring
disease of mankind. In this vascular lesions in the epithelial layers of ectodermal tissues are formed.
Most commonly this disease occurs in the mouth, on the lips, and at other skin sites.

Influenza: Influenza viruses are enveloped RNA viruses. Influenza is wide spread disease in man
and occurs in epidemic form.

Mumps and Measles: Mumps and Measles viruses belong to group paramyxoviruses. They are
large, enveloped, RNA viruses. Mumps is highly contagious, wide spread, but seldom fatal. About
60% of adults are immune to it. Measles is one of the commonest diseases of the childhood and
adult human population is equally susceptible the world over. This disease develops immunity in
its victim.

Polio: Poliomyelitis, caused by polio virus, is found all over the world . It occurs mostly in childhood.

(15) V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

The age at which primary infection occurs varies with social and economic factors. The polioviruses
are the smallest known viruses and contain RNA in spherical capsid. Some common human viral
dieases are shown in Fig 5.7.

>)
4

Measles | (d)

(c)

Fig. 5.7 Some common human viral diseases
Retroviruses

RNA tumor viruses have been known for many years. These viruses are widely distributed in nature
and are associated with tumor production in a number of animal species, such as fowl, rodents
and cats. The most familiar of viruses is the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) which causes
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).

The single stranded RNA tumor viruses, which also include retroviruses (oncoviruses), are
spherical in form , about |OOnm in diameter and enveloped by host plasma membrane. Although
a few retroviruses are non specific that is they can infect any cell, most of them can infect only host

V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

cells that possess required receptors. In the case of AIDS virus, the host cell possesses a receptor
that allows the viral adsorption and penetration in several types of leukocytes (white blood cells)
and tissue cells. The retroviruses have a special enzyme called reverse transcriptase, which can
convert a single -stranded RNA genome into double stranded viral DNA. Not only this DNA can
infect host cells, but it also can be incorporated into host genome as a provirus that can be passed
on to progeny cells. In this way, some of retroviruses can convert normal cells into cancer cells.

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)

The AIDS was reported by some physicians in early 1980's in young males having one or more of
complex symptoms such as severe pneumonia, a rare vascular cancer, sudden weight loss, swollen
lymph nodes and general loss of immune functions. All these young patients were homosexuals.
Soon after the disease was discovered in nonhomosexual patients who were given blood (blood
transfusion) or blood products. In 1984 the agent causing the disease was identified by research
teams from Pasteur Institute in France and National Institute of health in USA. In 1986 the virus was
named as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (Fig 5.8). The major cell infected by HIV is the
helper T-lymphocyte, which is major component of immune system. As the HIV infection continues
in the host, the decrease of helper T-lymphocytes results in failure of the immuhe system and the
infected person becomes susceptible to other diseases. Cells in central nervous system can also be
infected by HIV Fig. 5.9. Recent studies on HIV reveal that the virus infects and multiplies in monkey
but does not cause disease in them, which means that HIV is host specific.

ile
‘ siti ttn, ry

genome

Protein
capsid

Reverse
transcriptase

Viral
envelope

Envalope
spikes

‘]
3 f \.
Nau rth

Fig. 5.8 Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

(17) V: 1.1

The HIV is transmitted by intimate sexual contact, contact with blood and breast feeding. Healthcare
workers can also acquire HIV during professional activities. Avoiding the direct contact with HIV is
important measure for preventing the disease. Prevention of’ intravenous drugs with common
syringes and use of sterile needles/syringes and utensils is important. Now vaccine against HIV has
been synthesized and its experimental administration in humans started in early 2001 in South
Africa.

HIV
Cd4 receptor site

RNA (two identical stands'

Capsid
Envelope

‘cH
Attachment, entry, :
Reverse transcr plase

and unceilling :

The vinen enters the
hos call and is uncosied
in the cylaplasm,

Cd4 receptor
bearing
4 T-lymphocyte

Reverse transcription
and integration :

Reverse transcriptase uses
the vital RNA as a template
to make a strand of DNA
and (hen uses tha GNA
Strand as template to
Complete a ONA double
helix, (The orginal viral
RNA is degraded. )The
OMA, then enters the
RULES and inlagrates

Viral re

!

lial

RNA-DN
hybrid

Nucleus
Chreneecmeall

"DNA
She ‘

Into the chromosomal
OMA of the hos
becoming @ prowirus

(a)

Assembly and release:
New capsids assemble
around viral RNA and
altached reverse
tranéenplase molecules
and “bud” from the
plasma membrane.

Hepatitis

Viral a et | pa
protenis ~~"? —

1
af 5 om

3) Viral RNA and
Protein synthesis:
Tne previral DAA i
facie inte RA
and bainsiated inte
aan

Fig 5.9 Infection cycle of HIV

Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver. It is usually caused by viral infection, toxic agents or drugs.
It is characterized by jaundice, abdominal pain, liver enlargement, fatigue and some times fever. It
may be mild or can be acute and can lead to liver cancer. The different types of viral hepatitis are
Hepatitis A (formerly called infectious hepatitis is transmitted by contact with faeces from infected

V: 1.1

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

individuals.) Hepatitis B (serum hepatitis). Hepatitis C (formerly called non-A, non-B hepatitis)
passes through blood, from mother to child during pregnancy and afterward and by sexual contact.
Hepatitis D (delta hepatitis), Hepatitis E (a virus transmitted through the faeces of an infected
person), Hepatitis F, G (caused by viruses yet unidentified). Viruses of hepatitis A, B and C are
better known. Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is an RNA virus (non enveloped), which causes mild short
term, less virulent disease. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is also RNA virus (enveloped) causes infusion
hepatitis, which is less severe than hepatitis A or hepatitis B, but hepatitis C often leads to chronic
liver disease. Most recent work of Halbur and coworker (2001) reveals that pig could be the source
of infection of hepatitis E.

Hepatitis B (HBV) is the second major form of hepatitis. It is caused by DNA virus which is very
common in Asia, China, Philippines, Africa and the Middle East. Hepatitis B is transmitted by the
exchange of body fluids, for example blood serum, breast milk and saliva, from mother to child
during birth or afterward and by sexual contact.. During acute attacks of Hepatitis B fatigue, loss of
appetite and jaundice are reported. Infected persons can recover completely and become immune
to the virus. People with chronic hepatitis infection are at the risk of liver damage. Hepatitis can be
controlled by adopting hygienic measures, with routine vaccination and screening of blood/ organ/
tissue of the donor.

Genetically engineered vaccine is available for HBV.
Vaccine is also available for HAV but not for HCV.

MakeAGIF.com

Animation 5.5: HIV

Source and Credit:

V: 1.1

Q.1.

5. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab

Fill in the blanks

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(vili)

(ix)

(x)

C. Linneaus divided all known forms of life into two kingdoms: _ and__.
Bacteria were placed in the kingdom __ because they have cell walls, and
protozoa were placed in the kingdom _ _because they move from place

to place and ingest food.

The most common system of classification used today, developed in 1969 by
Robert Whittaker of Cornell University, uses five kingdoms: ____ and
Whittaker’s five kingdom system of classification recognizes two basic types of
cells : and___ _
In five kingdom system of classification proposed by Margulis and Schwartz
organelles of symbiotic origin such as and were also considered.

A bacteriophage reproduces by using the metabolic machinery of.

The protein coat that encloses the viral genome is called : It is made
up of
Retroviruses are viruses which have specific enzymes ___

by which they convert RNA to DNA.

HIV infects _ and the defects in these cells lead to failure in
system.

Hepatitis iscausedby_i.

Viral Hepatitis is of types. Hepatitis A and C are caused by
virus whereas _ virus is the causative agent of Hepatitis B.

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

CHAPTER

Prokaryotae
(Monera)

Animation 6.1: Enzyme
ource & Credit: Wikispaces

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

Kingdom Prokaryotae consists of organisms with prokaryotic cells. In Greek the word Pro means
“before” and karyon means nucleus. Microbiologists place bacteria in two major categories:
eubacteria (Greek for “true bacteria”) and a much smaller division, the archaeobacteria (Greek for
“ancient bacteria”).

DISCOVERY OF BACTERIA

It had long been suspected that small creatures exist which are too small to be seen with naked
eye. But their discovery was linked to the invention of microscope. A Dutch Scientist “AntonieVan
Leeuwenhoek” (1673) was the first to report the microbes such as bacteria and protozoa. He used a
simple microscope to describe bacteria and protozoa with accurate drawings and descriptions and
called these small creatures as “animalcules”. He firstly observed small creatures in rain water,
then confirmed these in saliva, vinegar, infusions and other substances.

The progress in understanding the nature and importance of these tiny organisms has been slow. The
existance of microbes was further confirmed by Louis Pasteur’s work. Pasteur went on making many
discoveries in the field’of microbiology and medicine. His main achievements are the development
of vaccines for disease anthrax, fowl cholera and rabies. He also made significant contributions
in development of pasteurization process and development of fermentation industries. He proved
that microorganisms could cause disease.

Rohert Koch formulated the ‘germ theory of disease’. He isolated typical rodshaped bacteria with
squarish ends (baccilli) from (he blood of sheep that had died of anthrax. Then he discovered
bacteria that caused tuberculosis and cholera. He formulated four postulates, which are the
main pillars of the germ theory of disease. These are used to find out whether the organism found
in disease lesions is the causal agent of the disease or not.

1. A specific organism can always be found in association with a given disease.

2. The organism can be isolated and grown in pure culture in the laboratory.

3. The pure culture will produce the disease when inoculated into susceptible animal.

4. It is possible to recover the organism in pure culture from experimentally infected animal.

Koch and his colleagues invented many techniques concerning inoculation, isolation, media
preparation, maintenance of pure cultures and preparation of specimens for microscopic

examinations.
(2) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

OCCURRENCE OF BACTERIA

Bacteria are wide spread in their occurrence. They are found almost everywhere, in air, land, water,
oil deposits, food, decaying organic matter, plants, man and animals. Their kind and number vary
according to locality and environmental conditions. Some bacteria are always present and contribute
towards the natural flora. Others are present in specific environments such as hot springs, alkaline/
acidic soil, highly saline environments, in highly polluted soils and waters.

Animation 6.2: Bacteria Animated
Source and Credit: pinterest

G) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

STRUCTURE OF BACTERIA

All bacterial cells invariably have a cell membrane, cytoplasm, ribosome, and chromatin bodies.
The majority have a cell wall, which gives shape to the bacterial cell. Specific structures like capsule,
slime, flagella, pili, fimbriae and granules are not found in all bacteria (refer to Fig. 4.17).

Size
Bacteria range in size from about 0.1 to 600 um over a single dimension. Bacteria vary in size
as much as in shape. The smallest (e.g., some members of
the genus Mycoplasma) are about 100 to 200 um in diameter,
approximately the size of the largest viruses (poxviruses)
Escherichia coli, a bacillus of about average size, is 1.1 to 1.5
um wide by 2.0 to 6.0 um long. Some spirochetes occasionally
reach 500 um in length whereas Staphylococci and Streptococci
are 0.75 - 1.25u in diameter.

Shape of Bacteria

On the basis of general shape, bacteria are classified into three categories. These shapes are known
as cocci, bacilli and spiral Although most of the bacterial species have fairly constant characteristic
cell shape, yet some cells are pleomorphic and they can exist in a variety of shapes.

Rod (Bacillus)
Spherical (cocci)
. =e

Fig 6.1 Shapes of Bacteria

(4) V: 1.1


6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera)

eLearn.Punjab

The cocci are spherical or oval bacteria having one of several distinct arrangements based on their
planes of division. If division is in one plane it will produce either a diplococcus or streptococcus

arrangement. When cocci occur in pairs then
arrangement is diplococcus, whereas when
cocci form long chain of cells then arrangement
is called as streptococci. When the division of
cell is in two planes it will produce a tetrad
arrangement. A tetrad is a square of 4 cocci.
Thirdly, when the division is in three planes, it
will produce a sarcina arrangement. Sarcinaisa
cube of 8 cocci. When division occurs in random
planes, it will produce a staphylococcus
arrangement in which cocci are arranged in
irregular, often grape-like clusters. Diplococcus
pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus are some
examples of cocci.

Fig. 6.2 Cocci

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera)

Bacilli are rod-shaped bacteria. Bacilli all
divide in one plane producing a bacillus,
streptobacillus, or diplobacillus. Bacillus
is a single cell of bacteria. Streptobacillus is
a chain of bacilli. When rod shaped bacteria
occur in pairs then arrangement of cells
is Known as diplobacilli. Examples of rod
shaped bacteria are Escherichia coli, Bacillus
subtilis, Pseudomonas.

eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 6.3 Bacilli

The spiral shaped bacteria are spirally
coiled. Spirals come in one of three forms, a
vibrio, a spirillum, or a spirochete. Vibrio
is curved or comma-shaped rod. Spirillum
is a thick, rigid spiral. Spirochete is a thin,
flexible spiral. Examples of spiral shaped
bacteria are Vibrio, Hyphomicrobium.

Pr

Spirochete

Fig. 6.4 Spirilla

(6) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

Bacterial Cell Structure

Flagella and their frictions : These are extremely thin, hair like appendages. They come out
through cell wall and originate from basal body, structure just beneath the cell membrane in the
cytoplasm. They are made up oif protein flagellin. On the basis of presence of flagella, pattern
of attachment of flagella and the number of flagella present bacteria are classified into different
taxonomic groups. Atrichous means bacteria are without any flagella. When single polar flagellum
is present then condition is known as monotrichous. If tuft of flagella is present only at one pole of
bacteria then these are lophotrichous flagella. Amphitrichous is a condition when tuft of flagella at
each of two poles is present. In peritrichous form, flagella surround the whole cell. Most of bacilli
and spiral shaped bacteria have flagella. Cocci very rarely have flagella.

Primary function of flagella is to help in motility.With the help of flagella, flagellate bacteria can also
detect and move in response to chemical signals which is a type of behaviour called as Chemotaxis.

7) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

Animation 6.6: Flagelo
Source and Credit: gifsoup

Fig. 6.5 Rod shaped bacterium with flagella (lophotricous)

Pili a. d their Fu. ctio. s

These are hollow, nonhelical, filamentous appendages. Pili are smaller than flagella and are not
involved in motility. True pili are only present on gram-negative bacteria. They are made up of
special protein called pilin. They are primarily involved in a mating process between cells called
conjugation process. Some pili function as a means of attachment of bacteria to various surfaces.

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

The cell e. velope: The outer wrappi. g of bacteria
Bacterial surface and walls are very diverse. Collectively complexes of layer external to the cell
protoplasm are called as cell envelope and include capsule, slime and cell wall.

Capsule : Bacteria produce capsule, which is made up of repeating polysaccharide units, and of
protein, or of both, capsule is tightly bound to the cell. It has a thicker, gummy nature that gives
sticky characters to colonies of encapsulated bacteria. It provides pathogenicity.

Slime : Some bacteria are covered with loose, soluble shield of macromolecules which is called
as slime capsule and slime provides greater pathogenicity to bacteria and protects them against
phagocytosis.

Cel! Wall: Beneath the extracellular substances and external to cytoplasmic membrane cell wall
is present. It is a rigid structure. It determines the shape of bacterium. Cell wall also protect the
cells from osmotic lysis. Cell wall is only absent in mycoplasmas. Christain Gram developed the
technique of gram stain. Bacteria could be divided into two groups based on their response to gram
Staining procedure. By this Staining technique Gram-positive bacteria are stained purple (retain
the primary dye due to formation of CV-I complex) and Gram-negative bacteria are stained pink
(retain secondary dye) in colour. There are many structural differences between two groups (Table
6.1) which are the primary basis for difference in staining behaviour.

Table 6.1: Comparison of Gram-positive and Gram-negative cell walls.

1
Peptidoglycan (50% of dry
weight in some bacterial cells)
Teichoic acid
Lipoteichoic acid

Lipids (1-4%)
20-80 nm
No

Present in some
More permeable

(@) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

The cell walls of most bacteria have a unique macromolecule called as peptidoglycan. Its amount
varies in different types of bacteria. It is composed of framework of long glycan chains cross-linked
with peptide fragments. The intact cell wall also contains chemical constituents such as sugar
molecules, teichoic acid, lipoproteins and lipopolysaccharides, which are linked to peptidoglycan.

Several bacterial groups lack the cell wall structure characteristic of Gram positive or Gram negative
bacteria, and some bacteria have no cell wall at all. Cell walls of archacnbactcria are different
from eubacteria. They do not contain peptidoglycan. Their cell walls are composed of proteins,
glycoproteins and polysaccharides).

Cell Membra.e

Just beneath the cell wall is the cell membrane or plasma membrane. It is very thin, flexible and
completely surrounds the cytoplasm. Plasma membrane is very delicate in nature any damage to
it results in death o f the organism. Bacterial membranes differ from eukaryotic membranes in
lacking sterols such as cholesterol.

Cell membrane regulates the transport of proteins, nutrients, sugar and electrons or other
metabolites. The plasma membranes of bacteria also contain enzymes for respiratory metabolism.

Cytoplasmic matrix

Thecytoplasm of prokaryotic celllacks membrane bound organelles and cytoskeleton (microtubules).
The cytoplasmic matrix is the substance present between the plasma membrane and the nucleoid.
It has gel like consistency. Small molecules can move through it rapidly. The plasma membrane
and every thing present within it is known as protoplast. Thus the cytoplasmic matrix is a major
part of protoplast. Other large discrete structures such as chromatin /nuclear body, ribosomes,
mesosomes and granules and nucleoid are present in this matrix.

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

Nucleoid

A bacterial cell unlike the cells of eukaryotic organisms lacks discrete chromosomes and nuclear
membrane. The nuclear material or DNA in bacterial cells occupies a position near to the center
of cell. This material is a single, circular and double
stranded DNA molecule. It aggregates as an
irregular shaped dense area called the nucleoid.
This chromatin body is actually an extremely long
molecule of DNA that is tightly folded so as to fit
inside the cell component. Since bacteria have a
single chromosome, they are haploid.

Plasmid
Many bacteria contain plasmids in addition to chromosomes. These are the circular, double strand-
ed DNA molecules. They are self-replicating and are not essential for bacterial growth and metab-

olism. They often contain drug resistant, heavy met-

als, disease and insect resistant genes on them.

Ribosomes

Ribosomes are composed of RNA and proteins. Some may also be loosely attached to plasma

membranes. They are protein factories. There are thousands of ribosomes in each healthy growing
cell. They are smaller than eukaryotic ribosomes.

Mesosomes

The cell membrane, invaginates into the cytoplasm forming structure called as mesosome.
Mesosomes are’in the form of vesicles, tubules or lamellae. Mesosomes are involved in DNA
replication and cell division where as some mesosomes are also involved in export of exocellular
enzyme. Respiratory enzymes are also present on the mesosomes.

Gra.ules a.d storage bodies

Since bacteria exist in a very competitive environment where nutrients are usually in short supply.
They tend to store extra nutrients when possible. These may be glycogen, sulphur, fat and
phosphate. In addition, cells contain waste materials that are subsequently excreted. For example,
common waste materials are alcohol, lactic acid and acetic acid.

Spores
Certain species of bacteria produce spores, either external to the vegetative cells (exospores) or

(11) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

within the vegetative cells (endospores). They are metabolically dormant bodies and are produced
at a late-stage of cell growth. Spores are resistant to adverse physical environmental conditions
such as light, high temperature, desiccation, DH and chemical agents, Under favorable conditions
they germinate and form vegetative cells.

Cysts
Cysts are dormant, thick-walled, desiccation resistant forms and develop during differentiation of
vegetative cells which can germinate under suitable condition. They are not heat resistant.

Nutritio. of Bacteria

Like other organisms bacteria need energy for their growth, maintenance and reproduction. Most
bacteria are heterotrophic i.e.. they cannot synthesize their organic compounds from simple
inorganic substances. They live either as saprophytes or as parasites. Saprophytic bacteria get
their food from dead organic matter. Soil is full of organic compounds in the form of humus. Humus
is the material resulting from the partial decay of plants and animals. Many soil inhabiting bacteria
have vety extensive enzyme system that breaks down the complex substances of humus to simpler
compounds. The bacteria can then absorb and utilize these simpler substances as a source of
energy. Parasitic bacteria for their nutrition are fully dependent on their host.

Some kinds of bacteria are auotrophic i.e., they can synthesize organic compounds which are
necessary for their survival from inorganic substances.These bacteria may be separated into two
groups: photosynthetic autotrophs and chemosynthetic autotrophs. Photosynthetic bacteria
possess chlorophyll which differs from the chlorophyll of green plants. Unlike most green plants,
which have their chlorophyll in chloroplasts, bacterial chlorophyll is dispersed in the cytoplasm.
During photosynthesis the autotrophic bacteria utilize hydrogen sulphide (H,S) instead of water as
a hydrogen source and liberate sulphur instead of oxygen. Nitrifying bacteria are chemosynthetic.
Chemosynthetic bacteria oxidize inorganic compounds like ammonia, nitrate, nitrite, sulphur or
ferrous iron and trap the energy thus released for their synthetic reactions. The overall reaction of
photosynthesis in photosynthetic bacteria can be written as :

Light
CO,+2H,S —~ (CH,O) +H,0 +2S
Chlorophyll

Green sulphur bacteria, purple sulphur bacteria and purple non-sulphur bacteria are photosynthetic

bacteria.
(22) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

Respiratio. 1. Bacteria

Respiration in bacteria may be aerobic (requiring free oxygen) or anaerobic not requiring free
oxygen. Bacteria, which are able to grow in the presence of oxvgen, are called aerobic bacteria. While
those which can grow in the absence of oxygen are known Pseudomonas is an aerobic bacterium.

as anaerobic bacteria. Some bacteria are neither aerobic

nor anaerobic, but facultative. Facultative bacteria grow

either in the presence or absence of oxygen. Some bacteria £0! /S 4 facultative anaerobic bacterium.
require a low concentration of oxygen for growth and are Campylobacter is a microaerophilic bacterium.
known as microaerophilic.

Spirochete is an anaerobic bacterium.

Growth a.d Reproductio.

Bacterial growth refers commonly to increase in number of bacterial cells. Bacteria increase in
number by an asexual means of reproduction, called binary fission. In binary fission parent cell
enlarges, its chromosome duplicates, and plasma membrane pinches inward at the center of the
cell. When nuclear material has been evenly distributed, the cell wall grows inward to separate cell
into two. This sequence is repeated at intervals by each new daughter cell which in turn increases
the population of cells. Once the division is complete, bacteria grow and develop their unique
features. The interval of time until the completion of next division is known as generation time.
Four distinct phases are recognized in bacterial growth curve.

Chromosome

Cell wal p |
—> —+) 9 hes

cells
ar

Cell membran

Parent
bacterial cell

Fig. 6.6 Binary Fission in bacteria

(13) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

1) Lag phase: It is phase of no growth. Bacteria prepare themselves for division.
2) Log phase: It is phase of rapid growth. Bacteria divide at exponential rate.
3) Stationary phase: Bacterial death rate is equal to bacterial rate of reproduction and

multiplication.
4) Death/Decline phase: Bacteria start dying. Here the death rate is more than reproduction
rate.

Bacteria lack traditional sexual reproduction and mitosis. However, some bacteria transfer genetic
material from a donor bacterium to a recipient during a process called conjugation. Some
conjugating bacteria use specialized sex pili to transfer genetic material. Conjugation produces
new genetic combinations that may allow the resulting bacteria to survive under great variety of
conditions.

IMPORTANCE OF BACTERIA

Ecological importa.ce

Bacteria are ecologically very important. They are highly adaptable as a group and are found nearly
everywhere. They are able to decompose organic matter and play a significant role in the completion
of cycles of nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur and carbon.

Eco.omic Importa.ce

Bacteria are used in number of industries, including food, drugs (production of antibiotics and
vaccines) and in biotechnology. Bacteria are also responsible for spoilage of food and vegetables.
Many plant pathogens adversely affect the agricultural industry.

Medical Importa.ce
Bacteria are very common pathogens of humans. Approximately 200 species are known to cause
diseases in humans. Many bacteria normally inhabit the bodies of man and other animals.

Co.trol of bacteria

Control of microorganisms is essential in home, industry as well as in medical fields . By controlling
microorganisms one can prevent and treat diseases. Spoilage of foods and other industrial products
can be inhibited by controlling microorganisms.

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

Microorganisms can be controlled by various methods.

Physical methods : In this, steam, dry heat, gas, filtration and radiation are used to control
bacteria. The process in which we use physical agents to control bacteria/microorganism is known
as Sterilization process. Sterilization is destruction of all life forms.

High temperature is usually used in microbiological labs for control of microbes. Both dry heat and
moist heat are effective. Moist heat causes coagulation of proteins and kills the microbes. Dry heat
causes oxidation of chemical constituents of microbes and kills them.

Certain electromagnetic radiations below 300 nm are effective in killing of microorganisms. Gamma
rays are in general used for sterilization process.

Heat sensitive compounds like antibiotics, seras,-hormones etc. can be sterilized by means of
membrane filters.

Chemical methods: One can use antiseptics, disinfectants and chemotherapeutic agents
for microbial control. Chemical substances used on living tissues that inhibit the growth of
microorganism are called antiseptics.

The important chemical agents used for disinfection are oxidising and reducing agents. For example
halogens and phenols, hydrogen peroxide, Potassium permanganate, alcohol and formaldehyde
etc. inhibit the growth of vegetative cells and are used on nonliving materials.

Chemotherapeutic agents and antibiotics work with
natural defense and stop the growth of bacteria and
other microbes. These are Sulfonamides, tetracycline;
penicillin, etc. They destroy or inhibit the growth of
microorganisms in living tissues.

Immunization and Vaccination : Methods

of prevention and treatment that have been introduced to control microbial diseases include
immunization (e.g. vaccination), antisepsis (procedures to eliminate or reduce the possibility of
infection), chemotherapy and public health measures (e.g. water purification, sewage disposal,

and food preservation).
(45) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

Pasteur made many discoveries concerning the cause and prevention of infectious diseases. In
1880's he isolated the bacterium responsible for chicken cholera. He grew it in a pure culture. To
prove that he really had isolated the bacterium responsible for this disease Pasteur made use of the
fundamental techniques devised by Koch. He arranged experiments for a public demonstration in
which he repeated an experiment that had been successful in many previous trials in his laboratory.

He inoculated healthy chicken with his pure cultures and waited for them to develop chicken
cholera and die. But to his dismay, the chickens failed to get sick and die. Reviewing each step
of the experiment, Pasteur found that he had accidentally used the cultures several weeks old
instead of fresh one grown especially for the demonstration. He soon discovered that somehow
bacteria could lose their virulence, or ability to produce disease, after standing and growing old. But
these attenuated, or less virulent, bacteria could still stimulate the host (in this case the chicken) to
produce antibodies, substances that protect the host (in this case the chicken) against infection due
to subsequent exposure to the virulent organism.

Pasteur next applied this principle of inoculation with attenuated cultures to the prevention of
anthrax, and again it worked. He called the attenuated cultures of bacterial vaccine (a term derived
from the Latin Vacca, “cow”) and immunization with attenuated cultures of bacteria, vaccination.

Pasteur honoured Edward Jenner (1749-1823), who had successfully vaccinated a boy against
small pox in 1796. Jenner had learned that milkmaids who contracted cowpox from the cows, they
milked, never subsequently contracted the much more virulent small pox. Accordingly he tested
this hypothesis by inoculating young James Phipps first with cowpox causing material and later
with small pox causing material. The boy did not get small pox.

Then Pasteur also made a vaccine for hydrophobia, or rabies, a disease transmitted to people by
bites from rabid dogs, cats, and other animals.

USE AND MISUSE OF ANTIBIOTICS

Antibiotics is a Greek word (Anti-against-and Bios life). Antibiotics are the chemotherapeutic
chemical substances which are used in treatment of infectious diseases. Antibiotics are synthesized
and secreted by certain bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi. Today, some antibiotics are synthesized
in the laboratory. However, their origins are living cells. To determine drug of choice, one must

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

know its mode of action, possible adverse side effects in
the human beings.

Massive quantities of antibiotics are being prepared and used, which are followed by the widespread
problems of drug resistance in microorganisms. This results in an increasing resistance against
disease treatments. Misused antibiotics can interact with the human metabolism and in severe
cases can cause death of human beings. Misuse of antibiotic such as penicillin can cause allergic
reactions. Similarly streptomycin can affect auditory nerve thus causing deafness. Tetracycline and
its related compounds cause permanent discoloration of teeth in young children.

CHARACTERISTICS OF CYANOBACTERIA

The cyanobacteria are the largest and most diverse group of photosynthetic bacteria which was
previously known as ‘blue green algae’. Cyanobacteria are true prokaryotes. They vary greatly in
shape and appearance. They range in diameter from about 1-10um and may be unicellular, exist as
colonies of many shapes, or form filaments consisting of trichomes (chains of cells) surrounded
by mucilaginous sheath. They have normal Gram-negative type cell wall. They lack flagella and
often use gas vesicles to move in the water, and many filamentous species have gliding motility.

Their photosynthetic system closely resembles that of eukaryotes because they have chlorophyll
a and photosystem II.They carry out oxygenic photosynthesis, i.e., they use water as an electron
donor and generate oxygen during photosynthesis. Cyanobacteria use phycobilins as accessory
pigments. Photosynthetic pigments and electron transport chain components are located in
thylakoid membranes linked with particles called phycobilisomes. Phycocyanin pigment (blue) is
their predominant phycobilin and CO, in them is assimilated through the Calvin cycle.

Reserve food material in cyanobacteria is glycogen. Cyanobacteria reproduce by binary fission,
fragmentation. In cyanobacteria hormogonia, akinetes and heterocysts are present.

(17) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
a ———

Helerocyst Resting spore

Fig. 6.8 Cyanobacterium Anabaena

ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE

They help in reclamation of alkaline soils . Cyanobacteria have heterocysts, which are helpful in the
fixation of atmospheric nitrogen. They release O, in the environment due to their photosynthetic
activity. Oscillatoriaandfewother cyanobacteria
can be used as pollution indicator. They have Super Blue green algae are basically expensive pond scum, in
symbiotic relationship with protozoa, fu ngi, which cyanobacterium is a single celled organism that produces

. a . + ge its own food through photosynthesis. It serves as a “complete
and nitrogen fixing Species form associations whole food” which contain 60% protein with all essential amino
with angiosperms. They are photosynthetic acids in perfect balance.

partners in most of lichen association.
Many species of cyanobacteria form water blooms where they often impart unpleasant smell and

due to large amount of suspended organic matter water becomes unfit for consumption. Some
species produce toxins that kill live stock and other animals that drink the water.

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

NOSTOC

Habitat a.d occurre.ce

Nostoc is common as terrestrial and subaerial cyanobacterium. It is widely distributed in alkaline
soils and on moist rocks and cliffs. Nostoc forms a jelly like mass in which numerous filaments are
embedded.

Structure
Trichomes are unbranched and appear beaded. Individual cells are mostly spherical but some
times barrel shaped or cylindrical.

All cells in trichome are mostly similar in structure but at intervals are found slightly large , round,
light yellowish thick walled cells called as heterocysts. Trichome mostly breaks near heterocyst
and forms hormogonia and thus help in fragmentation.

Reproductio.

There is no sexual reproduction but it reproduces asexually by formation of hormogonia.
Hormogonia are formed when filament break at different points into smaller pieces.This is due to
death and decay of the ordinary cell or the heterocyst may serve as a breaking point. Reproduction
can also be due to akinete formation. Akinetes are thick walled , enlarged vegetative cells which
accumulate food and become resting cells. On arrival of favourable conditions they form normal
vegetative cell.

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

Q.1. Fill in the blanks.

(i)
(ii)

A bacterial arrangement in packets of eight cells is described as a------------- ;
The shape and arrangement of is diplococci

(iii) Pili are tubular shafts in bacteria that serve as a means of----------- .
(iV) 0 weee-e-=-=---- are unusual type of bacteria that live in extreme habitats.
(V) 0 weeeeeeeeeee- is a bacterium that is photosynthetic.
(Vi) 0 -ee-+=+-=+---- is a cyanobacterium.
(Vii) 9 ---------------- called as bloom forming organism.
(vii) Use of antibiotics is one of the means of controlling ------------- diseases.
Q.2. Short questions.
(i) (a) Name general characteristics that could be used to define the prokaryotes.
(b) Do any other microbial groups besides bacteria have prokaryotic cells?
(c) In what habitats are bacteria found? Give some general means by
which bacteria derive nutrients.
(ii) (a) List functions that the cell membrane performs in bacteria.
(6b) What are mesosomes and some of their possible functions?
(iii) What is unique about the structure of bacterial ribosomes?
(iv) Draw the three bacterial shapes.
(v) Name a bacterium that has no cell wall.
(vi) A gram stained discharge from an dbcess shows cocci in irregular grape
like clusters. What is the most likely genus of this bacterium
(vii) Draw an outline and label (i) streptobacilli, (ii) diplococci,

(iii) staphylococci.

V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab

(viil) You observe a culture of predominantly round (presumably spherical) bacteria
that though apparently fully divided, nevertheless have failed to separate, thus
resulting in long chains of cells. What, generally, might you call such an

arrangement?
(ix) Match the following descriptions with the best answer.
(a) Division in one plane; cocci arranged in pairs (a) Bacillus
(b) Division in one plane; cocci arranged in chains (b) Streptobacillus

(c) Division in two planes; cocci arranged in a
square of four
(c) Spirochete
(d) Division in one plane; rods completely separate

after division. (d) Spirillum
(e) Division in one plane; rods arranged in chains. (e) Vibrio
(f) Acomma shaped bacterium (f) Streptococcus
(g) A thin, flexible spiral. (g) Staphylococcus
(h) A thick, rigid spiral. (h) Diplococcus
(i) Tetrad
(j) Sarcina
Q.3. Extensive Questions
(i) Describe in detail the structure of bacterial cell wall, emphasizing Gram positive

and Gram negative properties.
(ii) Write an account of different methods used for controlling microbes.

(iii) Discuss the role of antibiotics and immunization in controlling bacterial diseases.
What problem can arise due to misuse of antibiotics.

(iv) Describe general characteristics of Cyanobacteria with special reference to
Nostoc.

(21) V: 1.1

6. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera)

(v) Write Notes on:
(a) Koch's postulates
(c) Flagella and pili

(b)
(d)

eLearn.Punjab

Shape of bacteria
Growth in bacteria.

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

CHAPTER

THE KINGDOM
PROTISTA
(OR PROTOCTISTA)

/

Animation 7.1: Kingdom Protista

V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

The Kingdom Protista consists of a vast assortment of primarily aquatic eukaryotic organisms whose
diverse body forms, types of reproduction, modes of nutrition and lifestyles make them difficult to
characterize. Basically, this kingdom is defined by exclusion i.e., all members have characteristics
that exclude them from the other four kingdoms.

All protists are eukaryotic and have evolved from prokaryotes. Another reason for creating a
separate kingdom arises from the difficulty in placing certain eukaryotic organismsinthe appropriate
kingdom. This difficulty is a consequence of the fact that the other eukaryotic kingdoms have their
evolutionary origin in kingdom Protista. The other eukaryotic kingdoms Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia
arose from protists in various ways.

The protists are unicellular, colonial or simple multi cellular organisms that possess a eukaryotic
cell organization. Eukaryotic cells, the unifying feature of protists, are common to complex multi-
cellular organisms belonging to the three eukaryotic kingdoms (Fungi, Plantae and Animalia) but
clearly differentiate protists from members of the prokaryotic kingdom (Monera). Unlike plants
and animals, however, protists do not develop from a blastula or an embryo.

The kingdom protista contains four major groups of eukaryotic organisms which are : single celled
protozoans, unicellular algae, multicellular algae, slime molds and oomycotes.

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

In 1861, John Hogg proposed the kingdom Protoctista for microscopic organisms. In 1866, Ernst
Haeckel suggested creating the Kingdom Protista to include bacteria and other microorganisms
(such as Euglena) that kingdom. He, however, separated blue green algae and bacteria (prokaryotes)
from nucleated protists and placed them in a separate group he called Monera, within the kingdom
Protista.

In 1938, Herbert Copeland elevated the prokaryotes to kingdom status, thus separating them from
Protista. In five kingdom system of Robert Whittaker (1969) only unicellular eukarayotes were
placed in kingdom Protista. Currently this kingdom also includes colonial and simple multicellular
eukaryotes as well. Margulis and Schwartz (1988) modified the five kingdom system. Protista or
Protoctista is one of the five kingdoms. (@)

V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

(a) (b) (c)

Fig 7.1 The kingdom protista includes such diverse species as (a) single celled ciliated protozoan, (b) giant brown algae (kelps) and (c)
slime molds.

DIVERSITY AMONG PROTISTA

During the course of evolutionary history, organisms in the kingdom protista have evolved diversity
in their (a) size and structure, (6) means of locomotion, (c) ways of obtaining nutrients, (d) interactions
with other organisms, (e) habitat and (f) modes of reproduction. Diversity is exhibited by all of the
major protist groups (Fig. 7.1).

Based on the diversity, most biologists regard the protists kingdom as a polyphyletic group of

organisms; that is, the protists probably do not share a single common ancestor. Margulis and
Schwartz have listed 27 phyla to accommodate this diverse assemblage of organisms.

MAJOR GROUPS OF PROTISTA

1. Protozoa: A. imal - like Protists
All protozoans are unicellular. Most ingest their food by endocytosis. A summary of protozoan

diversity is given in Table 7.1.
G) V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Table 7.1 Some groups of protozoa

Unicellular, no
definite shape
Unicellular.
some colonial
Unicellular

Unicellular
Unicellular
Unicellular

(a) Amoebae:

This group includes all free living freshwater,
marine and soil amoebae as well as those that
are parasites of animals. Amoebae lack flagella
and move by forming specialized cytoplasmic
projections called pseudopodia (false feet). (Fig.
7.2).

The intestinal parasite, Entamoeba histolytica,
causes; amoebic dysentery in humans.

Fig. 7.2 The flowing pseudopods of
Amoeba constantly change shape as the
organism moves and feeds.

Animation 7.2: Amoeba
Source and Credit: Gifsoup

4) oor

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

(b) Zooflagellates:

These protists are mostly unicellular (a few are colonial) organisms with spherical or elongated
bodies with a single central nucleus. They possess from one to many long, whip-like flagella that
enable them to move. Flagellates move rapidly, pulling themselves forward by lashing flexible
flagella, that are usually located at the anterior end.

Flagellates obtain their food either by ingesting living or dead organisms or by absorbing nutrients
from dead or decomposing organic matter. They may be free-living, symbionts or parasites.
Trichonymphas are complex, specialized flagellates with many flagella which live as symbionts in
the guts of termites and help in the digestion of dry wood (Fig. 7.3a)

G) V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

(a)

Fig. 7.3 Zooflagellates (a) Trichonympha has hundreds of flagella (b) Trypanosoma causes sleeping sickness.

Animation 7.4: Paramecium Contractile Vacuole
Source and Credit: gif2fly

(6) V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista)

Parasitic flagellates cause diseases. For example
Trypanosoma is a human parasite causing African sleeping
sickness. It is transmitted by the bite of infected tsetse fly
( Fig. 7.3 b)

Choanoflagellates are sessile marine or freshwater
flagellates which are attached by a stalk and their single
flagellum is surrounded by a delicate collar. They are of
special interest because of their striking resemblance to
collar cells in sponges (Fig. 7.4).

(c) Ciliates

eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 7.4 A colonial choanoflagellate

Ciliates are unicellular organisms with a flexible outer covering called a pellicle that gives them
a definite but changeable shape. In Paramecium, the surface of the cell is covered with several
thousand fine, short, hair-like structures called cilia. The cilia beat in such a precisely coordinated

fashion that the organism can go forward, can also go back and turn around.

Some ciliates are sessile and remain attached to a rock or other surface. Their cilia set up water
currents that draw food towards them. Most ciliates ingest bacteria or other tiny protists.

V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

(a) (b)

Fig. 7.5 (a) Paramecium, conjugating individuals (b) Stentor, a sessile ciliate.

Water regulation in freshwater ciliates is controlled by special organelles called contractile vacuoles.
Ciliates differ from other protozoans in having two kinds of nuclei. One or more small diploid
micronuclei that function in sexual process, and a large, polyploid macronucleus that controls cell
metabolism and growth. Most ciliates are capable of a sexual process called conjugation. During
conjugation two individuals come together and exchange genetic material (Fig. 7.5).

Animation 7.6: Paramecium Reproduction
Source and Credit: buzzle

V: 1.1

Animation 7.7: Paramecium Contractile Vacuole
Source and Credit: gif2fly

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
(d) Foraminiferans and Actinopods

These marine protozoans produce shells (ortests). Tests of foraminifera are made of calcium whereas
those of actinopods are made of silica. The shells or tests contain pores through which cytoplasmic
projections can be extended. These cytoplasmic projections form a sticky, interconnected net that
entangles prey. Dead foraminiferans sink to the bottom of the ocean where their shells form a grey
mud that is gradually transformed into chalk. Foraminiferans of the past have created vast limestone
deposits.

(b) ic)

Fig. 7.6 (a) Foraminiferan tests have (a) beautiful geometric patterns and (b) pores through which cytoplasmic projections are extended
(c) Radiolarians are actinopods with glassy shells.

(e) Apicomplexans

Apicomplexans are a large group of parasitic protozoa, some of which cause serious diseases such
as malaria in humans. Apicomplexans lack specific structures for locomotion but move by flexing.
At some stage in their lives, they develop a spore, a small infective agent transmitted to the next
host. Many Apicomplexans spend part of their life in one host and part in a different host species
(Fig. 7.7).

V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

(1) Mosquito injects
Sporozoites

(4) sporozoites form
within mosquito

ae 2
Docysts
Egg

Zygote

Certain merozoites.
develop into
gametocytes

Sperm

amfetocytes

(3) Gametocytes are
ingested by mosquito

Fig. 7.7 The life cycle of the malarial parasite (Plasmodium).

Plasmodium, the apicomplexan that causes malaria, enters human blood through the bite of an
infected female Anopheles mosquito. Plasmodium first enters liver cells and then red blood cells,
where it multiplies. When each infected red blood cell bursts, many new parasites are released.
The released parasites infect new red blood cells, and the process is repeated. The simultaneous
bursting of millions of red cells causes the symptoms of malaria; a chill, followed by high fever
caused by toxic substances that are released and affect other organs of the body (Fig. 7.7).

2. The Algae: Pla. t like protists

Algae (singular alga) are photosynthetic protists, carrying out probably 50 to 60 percent of all the
photosynthesis on earth (plants account for most of the rest).

Algae differ from the plants in their sex organs which are unicellular and the zygote is not protected
by the parent body. A plant zygote, on the other hand, grows into a multicellular embryo that is

(11) V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
protected by parental tissue.

Algae exhibit a remarkable range of growth forms. Some are unicellular; others are filamentous.
Filaments are composed either of distinct cells or coenocytes (multinucleate structures that lack
cross-walls), still others (e.g. seaweeds) are multicellular and intricately branched or arranged in
leaf-like extensions. A body which is not differentiated into true roots, stems and leaves and lacks
xylem & phloem is called a thallus.

In addition to green chlorophyll a, yellow and orange carotenoids, which are photosynthetic pigments
are found in all algae, other algal phyla possess a variety of other pigments (such as xanthophylls
and phycoerythrin) that are also important in photosynthesis. Classification into phyla is largely
based on their pigment composition.

Algal life cycles show extreme variation, but all algae except members of the phylum Rhodophyta
(red algae) have forms with flagellated motile cells in at least one stage of their life cycle.

Almostall algae are aquatic. When actively growing, algae arerestricted to damp or wet environments,
such as the ocean; freshwater ponds, lakes, and streams; hot springs; polar ice; moist soil, trees,
and rocks. Table 7.2 summarizes the classification of algae.


7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Table 7.2 Classification of the photosynthetic Protoctists

Form Pigments | Pameles

Chl. a, Chl. b Euglena
Carotenoids

Euglenoids Unicellular

Dinoflagellates Unicellular Chl. a, Chl. c Gonyaulax,
Carotenes Ceratium
including
Fucoxanthin

Diatoms Usually Chl. a, Chi. c Diatoma,

unicellular Carotenes Frequilaria
including Pinnularia
Fucoxanthin

Brown algae = Multicellular Chl. a, Chl. c Fucusi
Carotenes Macrocvstis
including
Fucoxanthin

Red algae Multicellular Chl. a, Chondrus

or unicellular carotenes Polysiphonia
Phycoerythrin
Green algae Unicellular, Chl. a, Chl. b. Chlorella,
colonial, carotenes Ulva,
multicellular Acetabularia
Spirogyra


7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Euglenoids have at various times been
classified in the plant kingdom (with algae)
and in animal kingdom (in protozoans). Based
on molecular data, euglenoids are thought
to be closely related to zooflagellates. They
are plant like in their pigments. However,
some photosynthetic euglenoids lose their
chlorophyll when grown in dark and obtain
their nutrients heterotrophically by ingesting
organic matter. Other species of euglenoids
are always colourless and heterotrophic (Fig.
7.8).

Fig 7.8 : Euglenoids have special evolutionary
Significance as they resemble with plants and
green algae in having similar pigments and,
on the other hand, are also related One of
the most unusual protist to zooflagellates.

Animation 7.10: Euglenoids,
Source and Credit: gifsoup

@

- 1.1

Animation 7.11: Euglenoids

Source and Credit: sgprotist.files.wordpres

(ii) Dinoflagellates
One of the most unusual protist phyla is that of dinoflagellates. Most dinoflagellates are unicellular.
Their cells are often covered with shells of interlocking cellulose plates impregnated with silicates.

Ecologically, dinoflagellates are one of the most important groups of producers (second only to
diatoms) in marine ecosystem. Dinoflagellates are known to have occasional population explosions
or blooms. These blooms frequently colour the water orange, red or brown and are known as red
tides (Fig. 7.9).

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

(a) Flagellum (b)

Fig. 7.9 (a) A dinoflagell ate showing cellulose plates in the shell and flagella located in the grooves, (b) A red tide.

Animation 7.12: Dinoflagellates
Source and Credit: microscopy-uk

V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

The cell wall of each diatom consists of two shells that overlap where they fit together, much like a
petri dish. Silica is deposited in the shell, and this glasslike material is laid down in intricate patterns.

Fig. 7.10 Diatoms have silica shells with extremely beautiful symmetrical patterns

Diatoms are the major producers in the aquatic (marine and freshwater) ecosystems because of
their extremely large numbers. Diatoms are very important in aquatic food chains (Fig. 7.10).

Animation 7.13: Diatoms
Source and Credit: 49.media.tumb!

(17) V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Animation 7.14: Diatoms
Source and Credit: infinity-usa

Brown algae include the giants of the protist kingdom. All brown algae are multicellular and range
from a few centimeters to approximately 75 meters in length. The largest brown algae, called the
kelps are tough and leathery in appearance. They possess leaflike blades, stemlike stipes, and
rootlike anchoring holdfast. Brown algae are common in cooler marine waters, especially along
rocky coastlines in the intertidal zone (Fig. 7.11).

V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista)

Frond

Stipe

c mS Holdfast

Fig. 7.11 Laminaria, a brown alga showing blades, stipes and holdfast

eLearn.Punjab

: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Animation 7.15: Brown algae
Source and Credit: easterncapescubadiving

The multicellular body form of red algae is commonly composed
of complex interwoven filaments that are delicate and feathery. A
few red algae are flattened sheets of cells. Most multicellular red
algae attach to rocks or other substances by a basal holdfast. Some
red algae incorporate calcium carbonate in their cell walls from the
ocean and take part in building coral reefs alongwith coral animals
(Fig. 7.12).

Fig. 7.12  Polysiphonia is a
representative red alga with world

wide distribution
V: 1.1

Animation 7.17: Red Algae
Source and Credit:

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Green algae have pigments, energy reserve products, and cell walls that are identical to those of
plants. Green algae are photosynthetic, with chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, and carotenoids present
in the chloroplasts. Their main energy reserves are stored as starch. Most green algae possess
cell walls with cellulose. Because of these and other similarities it is generally accepted that plants
arose from ancestral green algae. Evidence from RNA sequencing also indicates that green algae
and the plants form a monophyletic lineage (Fig. 7.13).

Animation 7.18: Green Algae
Source and Credit: easterncapescubadiving

(22) V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

( (dd) (e)

Fig. 7.13 Green algae exhibit diverse forms, (a) Unicellular Chlamydomonas (b) Desmids have cells with two halves. (c) Colonial Volvox
(d) Filamentous Spirogyra (e) Ulva, having sheet like body.

Chlorella is a unicellular non-motile green
alga. Its habitat is fresh water ponds and
ditches. Itis easily cultured and has been used
as an experimental organism in research on
photosynthesis as well as being investigated
as an alternate source of food.


7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Importance of Algae

Algae have great economic and environmental importance for us. Some algae such as kelps are
edible and may be used to overcome shortage of food in the world. Marine algae are also source of
many useful substances like algin, agar, carrageenan, and antiseptics. Algae are major producers
of the aquatic ecosystem, thus they play a basic role in food chains, providing food and oxygen to
other organisms.

3. FUNGUS-LIKE PROTISTS

Some protists superficially resemble fungi in that they are not photosynthetic and some have bodies
formed of threadlike structures called hyphae. However, funguslike protists are not fungi for several
reasons. Many of these protists have centrioles and produce cellulose as a major component of
their cell walls, whereas fungi lack centrioles and have cell walls of chitin. Two major groups of
fungus-like protists are : Slime molds and water molds (oomycotes).

(i) Slime molds or Myxomycota
The feeding stage of a slime mold is a plasmodium, a multinucleate mass of cytoplasm that can
grow to 30cm (1 ft) in diameter. The plasmodium, which is slimy in appearance, streams over damp,

Fig. 7.14 Slime mold Physarum (a) The plasmodium is a naked mass of cytoplasm having many nuclei. (b) Reproductive structures

are stalked sporangia.
V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

decaying logs and leaf litter. It often forms a network of channels that cover a large surface area. AS
it creeps along, it ingests bacteria, yeasts, spores and decaying organic matter (Fig. 7.14).

During unfavourable condition, slime mold forms resistant haploid spore by meiosis within stalked
structures called sporangia. When conditions become favourable again, spores germinate into
biflagellated or amoeboid reproductive or swarm cells which unite to form diploid zygote. Zygote
produces multinucleate plasmodium, each nucleus being diploid.

The plasmodial slime mold Physarum polycephalum is a model organism that has been used to
study many fundamental biological processes, such as growth and differentiation, cytoplasmic
streaming, and the function of cytoskeleton.

Animation 7.19: Slime mould
Source and Credit: 49.media.tumbl


7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Water molds or Oomycotes

Oomycotes show close relations with the fungi and have a similar structure, but are now regarded
as more ancient group. Their cell walls contain cellulose, not chitin. Their hyphae are aseptate
(without cross walls). Oomycotes include anumber of pathogenic organisms, including Phytophthora
infestans, which have played infamous roles in human history.

Leaf mesophyll
cells

Branches
inside host
mesophyll cell

Lower
Intercellular epidermis
hypha Guard cell
Sporangiophore
Stoma

Sporangium

Fig. 7.15 Phytoplithora infestans growing in a diseased potato leaf, with sporangiophores emerging from the underside of the leaf.

Phytophthora infestans was the cause of Irish potato famine of the 19th century. It causes a disease
commonly known as late blight of potatoes. Because of several rainy, cool summers in Ireland in
the 1840's, the water mold multiplied unchecked, causing potato tubers to rot in the fields. Since
potatoes were the staple of Irish peasants’ diet, many people (250,000 to more than 1 million)
Starved to death. The famine prompted a mass migration out of Ireland to such countries as the

United States (Fig. 7.15).
V: 1.1

7. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab

Q.1. Short Questions
Write two characteristics of each of the following groups:
(i) Protozoa (ii) Dinoflagellates
(iii) Diatoms (iv) Slime molds
(iv) Oomycetes
Q.2. Extensive question.
(i) Discuss important features of protists. Why are protists so difficult to classify?
(ii) What are the reasons for grouping simple eukaryodc organisms into a

separate kingdom, protista?

(iii) How are protists important to humans? What is their ecological importance?
(iv) What are three major groups of protists?

(vi) Discuss general characteristics of algae.

(vii) Green algae are considered ancestral organisms of green land plants. Discuss.

(viii) | What features distinguish Oomycotes from fungi?

(ix) Describe structure and reproduction of slime molds.

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers

CHAPTER

Fungi
The Kingdom Of
Recyclers

Animation 8.1: Kingdom Fungi

Source & Credit: unifyingprinciplesofbiology

eLearn.Punjab

- 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Approximately 100,000 species of organisms called “fungi” are known and many more are
estimated to be present. This group includes notorious pathogens such as disastrous rusts, Smuts
of wheat and com, and molds found growing on important crops and foodstuff. Delicacies such as
mushrooms, truffles and morels, and other organisms of commercial use such as Penicillium - the
source of antibiotic penicillin, and the yeasts - used in bakeries and breweries are also members
of this group. Ecological role of fungi as decomposers is paralleled only by bacteria.

Taxonomic status of fungi has changed from that of ‘a group of Plant kingdom’ to a separate
kingdom “Fungi”. They resemble plants in some respects - have cell wall, lack centrioles and are
non-motile. But fungi resemble more animals than plants. Unlike plants and like animals, fungi are
heterotrophs, lack cellulose in their cell wall and contain chitin - the chemical found in external
skeleton of arthropods. For this reason, some mycologists (Scientists who study fungi) think that
fungi and animals probably arose from a common ancestor. But fungi are different from animals
in having cell wall, being absorptive heterotrophs and non-motile. So fungi are neither plants nor
animals. Their DNA studies also confirm that they are different from all other organisms. They show
a characteristic type of mitosis, called ‘nuclear mitosis’. During nuclear mitosis, nuclear envelope
does not break; instead the mitotic spindle forms within the nucleus and the nuclear membrane
constricts between the two clusters of daughter chromosomes. (In some fungi nuclear envelope
dismantles late). Because fungi are distinct from plants, animals and protists in many ways, they
are assigned to a separate kingdom ‘Fungi’.

THE BODY OF FUNGUS

The body of a fungus, called mycelium, consists of long, slender, branched tubular thread like
filaments called the hyphae (singular hypha). Hyphae spread extensively over the surface of
substratum. Chitin in their wall is more resistant to decay than are cellulose and lignin which
make up plant cell wall. Hyphae may be septate or non-septate. Septate hyphae are divided by
cross-walls called septa (singular septum) into individual cells containing one or more nuclei. Non-
septate hyphae lack septa and are not divided into individual cells; instead these are in the form
of an elongated multinucleated large cell. Such hyphae are called coenocytic hyphae, in which
cytoplasm moves effectively, distributing the materials throughout. Septa of many septate fungi

(2) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

have a pore through which cytoplasm flows from cell to cell, carrying the materials to growing tips
and enabling the hyphae to grow rapidly when food and water are abundant and temperature is
favourable. All parts of fungus growing through the substrate are metabolically active. Extensive
spreading system of hypae provides enormous surface area for absorption.

Fig 8.1 The fungus body plan: (a) Fungus mycelium growing on agar plate (b) Hyphae of mycelium (c) A coenocytic hypha (d) A septate
hypha with porous septa and monokaryotic cells (e) A septate hypha with dikaryotic cell.

Hyphae may be packed together and organized to form complex
reproductive structures such as mushrooms, puff balls, morels etc.
which can expand rapidly. Yeast are non-hyphal unicellular fungi.

All fungal nuclei are haploid except for transient diploid zygote
that forms during sexual reproduction.

NUTRITION IN FUNGI

All fungi lack chlorophyll and are heterotrophs (obtaining carbon and energy from organic
matter). They obtain their food by direct absorption from the immediate environment and are
thus absorptive heterotrophs. Most fungi are saprotrophs (or saprobes), decomposers that
obtain their food (energy, carbon and nitrogen) directly from dead organic matter. They secrete out
digestive enzymes which digest dead organic matter, and the organic molecules thus produced

G3) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

are absorbed back into the fungus. Saprobic fungi anchor to the substrate by modified hyphae,
the rhizoids. Fungi are the principal decomposers of cellulose and lignin, the main components
of plant cell walls (most bacteria cannot break them). Extensive system of fast growing hyphae
provides enormous surface for absorptive mode of nutrition. Saprobic fungi, alongwith bacteria,
are the major decomposers of the biosphere, contributing to the recycling of the elements (C, N, P,
0, H etc) used by living things.

Some fungi are parasites, some are even predators, and still others are mutualists. Parasitic
fungi absorb nutrients directly from the living host cytoplasm with the help of special hyphal tips
called haustoria. They may be obligate or facultative. Obligate parasites can grow only on their
living host and cannot be grown on available defined growth culture medium. Various mildews
and most rust species are obligate parasites. Facultative parasites can grow parasitically on their
host as well as by themselves on artificial growth media.

Some fungi are active predators. The oyster mushroom (Pleurotus ostreatus) is an omnivorous
(predatory) fungus. It paralyses the nematodes (that feed on this fungus), penetrate them, and
absorb their nutritional contents, primarily to fulfil its nitrogen requirements. It fulfills its glucose
requirements by breaking the wood. Some species of Arthrobotrys trap soil nematodes by forming
constricting ring, their hyphae invad and digest the unlucky victim. Other predators have other
adaptations, such as secretion of sticky substances.

Roundworm Constricting ring

Fig 8.2 Carnivorous fungi (a) The osyter mushroom decomposes wood, and also uses nematodes as a source of nitrogen (b) Anematode
is trapped in constricting ring of a soil - dwelling carnivorous fungus (Arthrobotrys sp.).

(4) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Fungi form two key mutualistic symbiotic associations (associations of benefit to both partners).
These are lichens and mycorrhizae.

Lichens are mutualistic symbiotic associations between certain fungi (mostly Ascomycetes and
imperfect fungi, and few Basidiomycetes - about 20 out of 15000 species of lichens) and certain
photoautotrophs-either green algae or a cyanobacterium, or some times both. Most of the visible
part of lichen consists of fungus, and algal components are present within the hyphae (Fig 8.3).

Fungus protects the algal partner from strong light and desiccation and itself gets food through the
courtesy of alga.

Lichens can grow at such places where neither of the components alone can, even at harsh places

such as bare rocks etc. Lichens vary in colour, shape, overall appearance, growth form (Fig 8.3).
They are ecologically very important as bioindicators of air pollution.

Video 8.2: Fungal network
Source and Credit: pmb.ox.ac

(5) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Soredia jasexual!
reproductive structures)
Surface

layer

(fungal hyphae)

Fungal hyphae
interwoven with
phototroph

Loosely
woven hyphae

Bottom layer
(fungal hyphae}

(a)

Rock or other surface
to which lichen is attached

Fruticose lichen
( Ramealirver)

Crustose lichens
(Bacdia, Lecanor |

Foliose lichen
( Parmetia)

Fig 8.3 Lichens (a) Cross section of a typical lichen showing different layers, (b) Different types of lichens varying in size, colour and
appearance. Three growth forms - crustose grow tightly attached to rocks, tree trunks etc; foliose are leaf - like, fruticose are branching.

(6) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Mycorrhizae are mutualistic association between certain fungi and roots of vascular plants (about
95% of all kinds of vascular plants). The fungal hyphae dramatically increase the amount of soil
contact and total surface area for absorption and help in the direct absorption of phosphorus, zinc,
copper and other nutrients from the soil into the roots. Such plants show better growth than those
without this association. The plant, on the other hand, supplies organic carbon to fungal hyphae.

There are two main types of mycorrhizae (Fig 8.4): endomycorrhizae, in which the fungal hyphae
penetrate the outer cells of the plant root, forming coils, swellings, and minute branches, and also
extend out into surrounding soil; and ectomycorrhizae, in which the hyphae surround and extend
between the cells but do not penetrate the cell walls of the roots. These are mostly formed with
pines, firs etc. However, the mycelium extends far out into the soil in both kinds of mycorrhizae.

Root cells of plants

(cross-section) Ectomycrrhizae

Endomycorrhizae
(a) (b)

Fig 8.4 Endomycorrhizae and ectomycorrhizae. (a) In endomycorrhiza (left side of figure), fungal hyphae penetrate and branch out
in a root cells. In ectomycorrhiza (right side of figure), fungal hyphae simply grow around but do not penetrate the root cell (b)
Ectomycorrhizae on roots of pines.

Fungi grow best in moist habitats, but are found wherever organic matter is present. They survive
dry conditions in some resting stage or by producting resistant spores. They can also tolerate a
wide range of pH from 2 - 9, a wide temperature range, and high osmotic pressure such as in
concentrated salt/sugar solutions as in jelly, jam etc. These features also help them in their survival
on land. Fungi store surplus food usually as lipid droplets or glycogen in the mycelium.

(7) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

REPRODUCTION

Most fungi can reproduce asexually as well as sexually (except imperfect fungi in which sexual
reproduction has not been observed).

Asexual reproduction

Asexual reproduction takes place by spores, conidia, fragmentation, and budding. Spores are
produced inside the reproductive structures called sporangia, which are cut off from the hyphae
by complete septa. Spores may be produced by sexual or asexual process, are haploid, non-motile
and not needing water for their dispersal, are small, produced in very large number and dispersed
by wind to great distances and cause wide distribution of many kinds of fungi, including many plant
pathogens. When spores land in a suitable place, they germinate, giving rise to new fungal hyphae.
Spores may also be dispersed by insects and other small animals and by rain splashes. Spores are
a common means of reproduction in fungi.

Conidia (singular conidium) are non- motile, asexual spores which are cut off at the end of modified
hyphae called conidiophores, and not inside the sporangia, usually in chains or clusters. These
may be produced in a very large number, can survive for weeks and cause rapid colonization of
new food.

Spocaregan (in)

LI

‘a a

‘ ee
pale

*
L Gecnnaiion
Adapaiicel
Aapreiuenon

% ea

Mircea (in)

Fig. 8.5 Spores are released from Fig. 8.6 Conidia cut off at the tip of

sporangia and germinate to conidiophores in clusters chains
produce new hyphae.

Fragmentation is simple breaking of mycelium of some hyphal fungi, each broken fragment giving

rise to anew mycelium.
V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Unicellular yeasts reproduce by budding (an asymmetric division in which tiny outgrowth or bud is
produced which may separate and grow (Fig 8.7), or by simple, relatively equal cell division.

‘Parent

eell

Fig. 8.7 Micrograph shows yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) in various stages of budding.

Sexual Reproduction

Details of sexual reproduction vary in different groups of fungi but fusion of haploid nuclei and
meiosis are common to all. When fungi reproduce sexually, hyphae of two genetically different but
compatible mating types come together, their cytoplasm fuse followed by nuclear fusion. In two of
the three main groups of fungi (Basidiomycetes, Ascomycetes), fusion of nuclei (karyogamy) does
not take place immediately after the fusion of cytoplasm (plasmogamy); instead the two genetic
types of haploid nuclei from two individuals may coexist and divide in the same hyphae for most
of the life of the fungus. Such a fungal hypha/cell having 2 nuclei of different genetic types is called
dikaryotic (also heterokaryotic) hypha/cell (Fig. 8.1).

Different groups of fungi produce different types of haploid sexual spores, such as basidiospores

and ascospores, subsequent upon meiosis in zygote. These spores may be produced by their
characteristic structure/fruiting bodies such as basidia/basidiocarps and asci/ascocarps.

(9) V: 1.1

Classification of fungi into four main groups is based primarily on the type of their sexual
reproductive structures and methods of reproduction. However, these groups also differ in the
type of hyphae and some other characters (Table 8.1).

Table 8.1 Classification of Fungi

Phylum (group) Typical examples Sexual Asexual Hyphae
reproduction reproduction
Zygomycota Rhizopus, (Black §_Zygospores Non-motile Nonseptate,
(Zygomycetes) bread mold) spores form in multi
Pilobolus (spitting sporangia nucleate
fungus)
Ascomycota Yeasts, morels, Ascospores Conidia cut Septate,
(Ascomycetes or truffles, powdery inside sac-like off from tips lengthy
sac - fungi) mildews,molds asci of dikaryotic
conidiophores phase.
Basidiomycota Mushrooms, rusts, Basidiospores Uncommon Septate,
(Basidiomycetes smuts, puffballs, borne on club lengthy
or club-fungi) bracket fungi shaped basidia dikaryotic
phase
Deuteromycota Aspergillus, Sexual phase Conidia Varied
(Deuteromycetes/ Penicillium, has not been
Imperfect fungi) | Altemaria observed

Zygomycota (Zygomycetes or Conjugating Fungi)

During their sexual reproduction, zygote formed directly by the fusion of hyphae forms temporary,
dormant, thick walled resistant structure called zygospore, hence the name Zygomycetes. Meiosis
takes place when zygospore germinates and haploid spores are produced. Spores on germination
produce new mycelium. Asexual reproduction by spores is common. Hyphae are coenocytic.

Example: Rhizopus, found growing on spoiling moist bread, fruit etc.

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Sporangium

om?z A ‘ “aaa ‘ © Mating
strain

<a a

\

anise Germinating
dusing Zygospore ——
germination

+ Matingstrain

ZYEospore

Gametangia

Fig. 8.8 Life cycle, of Rhizopus (black bread mold), a Zygomycete. Zygote formed by fusion, of gametangia directly develops into a
resting zygospore.

Ascomycota (Ascomycetes or Sac - Fungi)

It is the largest group of fungi, including over 60,000 species, 50% or so occurring in lichens and
some, such as morels, are mycorrhizal. Most are terrestrial, though some are marine or fresh water.
The group shows diversity from unicellular yeasts to large cup fungi and morels. They produce
haploid sexual spores called ascospores by meiosis inside their characteristic sac like structures
called asci (sing.ascus). Meiosis follows nuclear fusion inside the ascus, commonly 8 ascospores
are produced inside each ascus. Most sac-fungi have asci inside macroscopic fruiting bodies called
ascocarps-the visible morels etc. Their hyphae are septate. They have lengthy dikaryotic phase
that forms ascocarps. They reproduce asexually by conidia that are often dispersed by wind.

Yeasts are unicellular microscopic fungi, derived from all the three different groups of fungi but
mostly Ascomycetes, and reproducing mostly asexually by budding (Fig. 8.7).

(a1) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

However yeasts reproduce sexually by forming asci/ascospores or basidia/basidiospores.
They ferment carbohydrate (glucose) to ethanol and carbondioxide. Because of this
feature and many other reasons, these are of great economic importance (see economic
importance of fungi). Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the most commonly exploited yeast.

wee.
Se Ascospores

Fig. 8.9 Asci and Ascospores. Each ascus
contains eight haploid ascospores

(22) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Basidiomycota (Basidiomycetes or Club - Fungi)

These are among the most familiar fungi; edible mushrooms, devastating plant pathogens rusts
and smuts, puffballs, and bracket/shelf fungi are all club fungi. Basidiomycetes are named so for
their characteristics, club-shaped (hence also called club fungi) sexual reproductive structure, the
basidium (plural basidia). Nuclear fusion in the basidium is followed by meiosis.

Bsidiospores [nj

Baidium with
/ four appendages

nk Baidium containing
ieee’ =” four haploid nuclei (nj

j fraiting amucture |

| ldikaeyorle) hpphas.|*, f L Gills with basidia ] ny

— Basidiospores (nj

Fig. 8.10 Basidiomycetes. A mushroom’s fruiting structures. The gills on underside of mushroom’s cap are lined with basidia, on which
basidiospores are produced.

Four haploid sexual spores, called the basidiospores,
are born on, not inside, each basidium. During most
part of their life cycle the hyphae are septate; the cells
are uninucleate during one phase, and binucleate
(dikaryotic) during the remaining, lengthy phase. Their
characteristic fruiting bodies, or visible mushrooms,
are formed entirely of dikaryotic mycelium. Puccinia
species are most common rust fungi, and Ustilago
species most common smut fungi.

Rusts are called so because of numerous
rusty, orange-yellow coloured disease
spots on their host surface (mostly stem,
leaves), later revealing brick/rust-red
spores of the fungus. Smuts are called
so because of their black, dusty spore
masses that resemble soot or smut;
these spore masses replace the grain
kernels such as those of wheat, corn etc.
(Fig. 8.11, 8.15)

(23) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Spores (teliospores) of Ustilago tritici (loose smut of wheat) are carried by wind from infected wheat
ears to healthy flowers, where they germinate. The resulting hyphae penetrate flower ovaries.
Inside the ovary mycelium spreads and becomes dormant and remains so in the seed (grain). When
such infected seeds are sown next season, the hyphae also grow within the growing plant and form
smut spores inside the kernel, thus destroying them completely. The covering of the grain breaks
exposing the black spores mass, that may be dispersed by wind (Fig. 8.11)

— re
, 7. Mycelium flowers
| _ growth of growing ©. LD 8. Mycelial cells
point of plant " in kernels become
off | teliospores
6. Mycelium invades 9, Kernels of infected
young seeding plants are filled

with teliospores ;
3. Teliospores germinates F

on flower. Dikaryotic

5. Mycelium becomes dormant mycelium infects ff
'’, in the embryo of ovary
ay } infected wheat kernels aw 2) ’
ee Sl aa

breaks. Teliospores
blown away by

/ \
\ va / 1. Kernel membrane

" i t
4. Mycelium invades > aur CAITonAs
parts of embryo 2. Teliospores land on
in seed flowers of healthy
plants

Fig. 8.11: Disease cycle of loose smut of wheat caused by a club - fungus (Ustilago tritici)

V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Deuteromycota (Deuteromycetes or Imperfect Fungi)

This heterogenous group includes all such fungi in which sexual phase has not been observed.
Most of them are related to their sexually reproducing relatives of Ascomycetes; however some
are related to other two phyla (Zygomycota, Basidiomycota) as well. If sexual structures are found
on an imperfect fungus, it is then reassigned to the appropriate phylum. Biologists now can classify
most imperfect fungi on the basis of DNA sequences, though sexual structures may not be found.

Penicillium (blue, green molds), Aspergillus (brown molds), A/ternaria, Fusarium, Helminthosporium
are some of the economically important genera of Deuteromycetes (See economic importance of
fungi).

Penicillium sp. (blue, green molds) are wide spread saprotrophic species common on decaying
fruit, bread etc. Its hyphae are septate. Penicillium reproduces asexually by means of naked spores
called conidia. These are found in chains at the tips

of special hyphae called conidiophores, which are Saeed
branched. Brush-like arrangement of its conidia is parasexuality, in which portions of chromosomes of
characteristic of Penicillium (Fig. 8.12). These conidia 0 nuclei lying in the same hypha are exchanged.

give colour to the mycelial colony, which is circular.

Mature conidia are easily and readily dispersed.

V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

onidia in a chain

Conidia bud
1mm ath 4) J off an tip
SINS)
Conidiophore y Y y
\
| (
|
lL

J ye

( a |

am

(a) (b) Septate, brandhing mycelium

Fig. 8.12 Penicillium (a) A moldy orange; the blue mold is caused by saprobic species of Penicillium. (b) Penicillium showing asexual
reproduction, characteristic brush-like arrangement of conidia.

LAND ADAPTATIONS OF FUNGI

Fungi; although grow best in moist habitats, are found wherever organic matter is present. They are
a successful group of land organisms, and posses several features in their body and reproduction
that adapt them to their habit and terrestrial mode of life.

Extensive system of fast-spreading hyphae penetrate the substrate and enormously increase the
contact and surface area for absorption. Cytoplasmic flow throughout the hyphae is responsible for
their rapid growth and spread. Chitin in their thickened hyphal wall is more resistant to decay than
are cellulose and lignin found in plant cell wall. They can even break down the lignin (in addition to

V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

cellulose) to obtain their nutrients. In saprobes, certain modified hyphae called rhizoids anchor the
fungus to the substrate and also digest and then absorb the food.

They are very well adapted to live on land due to lack of flagellated cells, nonmotile spores and
conidia efficient dispersal by wind, thick-walled zygote and other resistant structures. Hyphae may
be modified in such a way as to enable them to reproduce themselves without dependence on
external water.

Many fungi are more tolerant than are bacteria to damage in hyperosmotic surroundings. Many
can tolerate temperature extremes - 5°C below freezing and 50°C or more. Now you can tell why
molds (e.g. Penicillium) can grow on oranges and jelly kept in a refrigerator, while generally bacteria
cannot.

IMPORTANCE OF FUNGI

Ecological Importance

Fungi have great ecological impact. They are very important as decomposers and symbionts. Fungi,
along with saprobic bacteria, play vital role in the recycling of inorganic nutrients in the ecosystem.
Without their activity all the essential nutrients would soon become locked up in the mounds of
dead animals, plants, would be unavailable for use by organisms, and life would cease. Mycorrhizal
fungi improve the growth of plants with which they are associated. 95% of all kinds of vascular
plants have this association.

Lichens growing on rocks break them, setting stage for other organisms during the course of
ecological succession. Lichens are very good bioindicators of air quality as they are very sensitive
to pollution. Some fungi are also used for bioremediation (degrading/removing environmental
poisons/pollutants by organisms).

Commercial Importance
Fungi cause economic gains as well as losses.

Economic gains due to fungi
1. Certain fungi are edible. About 200 species of mushrooms (e.g. Agaricus sp), morels (e.g. Morchella
esculenta), truffles (underground fruiting bodies of some

a7) V: 1.1

(b]

Fig. 8.13 Edible fungi (a) Acommon morel (Morchella esculenta). (b) The truffles (Tuber species) are underground fruiting bodies that
people find with the help of trained dogs or pigs.

Ascomycetes, e.g. Tuber sp) are common edible fungi. Beware of poisonous mushrooms called the
toadstools, such as death cap/death angel (Amanita) and jack-O’ latem mushroom (Fig. 8.14).

(a) (b)

Fig. 8.14 a: Poisonous mushroom Jack-O’ lantern (Omphalotus olearius) whose gills glow in the dark, b: Amanita, another common
poisonous mushroom.

Reindeer moss (a lichen, not a moss) is used as food for reindeers and some other large animals in
arctic/subarctic/boreal regions.

2. Certain fungi are used in food industry. Because of their fermenting ability, yeasts (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) are used in the production of bread and liquor. Penicillium species are used for giving
flavour, aroma and characteristic colour to some cheese. Some species of Aspergillus are used for

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

fermenting/producing soya sauce and soya paste from soya bean. Citric acid is also obtained from
some Aspergillus species.

3. Some fungi are source of antibiotics and some other drugs. Penicillin, first antibiotic to be
ever discovered (by A. Fleming-1928) is obtained from Penicillium notatum. Lovastatin is used for
lowering blood cholestrol; cyclosporine obtained from a soil fungus is used in organ transplantation
forpreventing transplant rejection; and ergotine to relieve one kind of headache migraine.
Griseofulvin is used to inhibit fungal growth.

4. Some natural dyes obtained from lichens are used in textile industry.

5. Yeasts are heavily used in genetic/molecular biological research because of their rapid
generation and rapidly increasing pool of genetic and biochemical information. Yeast were the first
eukaryotes to be used by genetic engineers. In 1983, a functional artificial chromosome was made
in Saccharomyces cervisiae. The same yeast was the first eukaryote whose genomic sequence was
completely studied in 1996. Yeasts are also being investigated for production of some hormones.
Pink bread mold Neurospora has also been used for genetic research.

Economic losses due to Fungi

1. Fungi are responsible for many serious plant diseases because they produce several enzymes
that can breakdown cellulose, lignin and even cutin. All plants are susceptible to them. Extensive
damages due to rusts and smut diseases of wheat, com (Fig. 8.15) and rice prompted mass
displacement, and starvation to death of many people.

Powdery mildews (on grapes, rose, wheat etc), ergot of rye, red rot of sugar cane, Potato wilt,
cotton root rot, apple scab, and brown rot of peaches, plums, apricots and cherries are some
other common plant diseases caused by fungi.

2. Fungi also cause certain animal diseases. Ringworm and athlete’s foot are superficial fungal
infections caused by certain imperfect fungi. Candida albicans, a yeast, causes oral and vaginal
thrush (Candidasis or candidosis). Histoplasmosis is a serious infection of lungs caused by inhaling
spores of a fungus which is common in soil contaminated with bird's feces. If infection spreads into
blood stream and then to other organs (which is very occassional), it can be serious and even fatal.
Aspergillus fumigatus causes aspergillosis, but only in persons with defective immune system such
as AIDS, and may cause death. Some strains of Aspergillus produce one of the most carcinogenic

V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

(cancer-causing) mycotoxins (toxins produced
by fungi), called aflatoxins. Aspergillus
contaminates improperlystored grains such
as peanuts and com etc. Milk, eggs and meat
may also have small traces of aflatoxins.
Any moldy human food or animal forage
product should be discarded. Ergotism is
caused by eating bread made from purple
ergot-contaminated rye flour. The poisonous
material in the ergot causes nervous spasm,
convulsion, Psychotic delusion and even
gangrene.

3. Saprobic fungi are not only useful recyclers
but also cause incalculable damage to food,
wood, fiber, and leather by decomposing
them. 15-50% of world’s fruit is lost each
year due to fungal attack. Wood-rotting fungi
destroy not only living trees but also structural
timber. Bracket/ shelf fungi (Fig. 8.16) cause
lot of damage to stored cut lumber as well as
stands of timber of living trees.

A pink yeast ( Rhodotorula) on shower curtains
and other moist surfaces.

Fig. 8.15 Plant Pathogenic fungus. Corn smut
on an ear of sweet corn is caused by Ustilago
maydis

Video 8.4: Mushrooms Fungi
Source and Credit:

V: 1.1

ENO

| as ha J
Ls

+ a
Pa =A

Fig. 8.16 ‘This shelf <taaintie is
parasitizing a tree. These are
important decomposers of wood

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

Q.1.

Q.2.

Short questions

(i)

(ii)

(ili)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(vili)

(ix)

(x)

What is a hypha? What is the advantage of having incomplete septa?

What is the composition of fungal cell wall and how is this composition
advantageous to fungi?

To which phyla do yeasts belong? How do they differ from other fungi?

Name sexual and asexual spores of Ascomycetes.

What are mycorrhizae?

By what means can individuals in imperfect fungi be classified?

Give a single characteristic that differentiates Zygomycota from Basidiomycota.

Why is green mold more likely to contaminate an orange kept in a refrigerator
than are bacteria?

What is a fungus?

State two parallel characteristics of Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes.

Extensive questions

(i)

(ii)

(ili)

(iv)

Discuss taxonomic status of fungi.

Summarise differentiating/distinguishing characteristics of four main groups of
Fungi, and give two common examples of each group.

State various features of fungi that adapt them to terrestrial mode of life.

What is ecological importance of saprotrophic fungi, of lichens and mycorrhizae?

(22) V: 1.1

8. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(vili)

Same enzymes of fungi are useful on one hand and harmful on other.
Discuss.

Name any four important fungal diseases of plants and four fungal diseases of
humans, and briefly describe any one of the plant diseases and any one of the
diseases of humans.

Describe, giving examples, different ways in which fungi are useful to humans.

Differentiate between the members of each of the following pairs.

(a) Spore/Conidium (b) Ascus/Basidium
(b) Dikaryotic/Diploid (c) Ascocarp/Ascus
(c) Obligate parasite/Facultative parasite

(d) Endomycorrhizae/Ectomycorrhizae

(e) Plasmogamy/Karyogamy

CHAPTER

9 Kingdom Plantae

Animation 9.1: Kingdom Plantae
ource & Credit: storify

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

During the past few decades biologists have been trying to classify living organisms into various
groups which could logically reflect their similarities and dissimilarities at various levels. The groups
were supposed to foreshadow the natural relationships among living organisms and their mode of
origin. Such a system of classification is called Phylogenetic System of Classification.

Kingdom Plantae mainly includes eukaryotic, autotrophic, multicellular, non motile organisms
which develop from embryos. Plant cells have cell wall outer to cell membrane which is composed
of cellulose. There are about 360,000 known species of plants.

CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTAE

For the sake of convenience organisms included in Plantae can be divided into two broad categories
viz. non vascular (Bryophyta) and vascular (Tracheophyta) plants. Although this grouping is not
according to any specific system of classification but it does reflect similarities and dissimilarities
among various groups of plants. Each category (division) is divided into Sub-divisions, Classes, Sub-
classes and other taxonomic ranks. Detailed discussion of classification of Plantae will be beyond
the scope of this book. Following is a brief outline of classification of Plantae.

Table 9.1: An outline of Classification of Plantae

Division : Bryophyta -(Non-Vascular Plants) Common Name
Sub Division Hepaticopsida Liverworts
Sub Division Musci (Bryopsida) Mosses
Sub Division Anthoceropsida Hornworts
Division : Tracheophyta - (Vascular Plants)
Sub Division Psilopsida Whisk ferns
Sub Division Lycopsida Club mosses
Sub Division Sphenopsida Horse tails
Sub Division Pteropsida Fern Seed plants
Class Filicineae Ferns
Class Gymnospermae Naked-seeded plants
Class Angiospermae Flowering Plants

@) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

DIVISION BRYOPHYTA

The first plants to colonize land were the bryophytes. They are
generally thought to have evolved from green algae.

The Bryophytes are poorly adapted to live on land and are mainly
confined to damp shady places (Fig. 9.1).

These plants are devoid of specialized conducting (xylem and
phloem) and strengthening tissues. Only the process of diffusion
and osmosis helps in the transportation of water and minerals as
well as in transportation of prepared food and other substances.
The plant body is with a proper cuticle, or has a very thin one.
The water is absorbed by the general surface of the plant. The a
bryophytes are said to be the amphibians of the plant world "8%! Sr vcatiks aa Grain shen,
because they cannot live away from water. They need water for they are most common in damp habitate
reproduction (Fig. 9.2).

The bryophytes are non- vascular }s %
flowerless plants. These plants show a 4
regular alternation of heteromorphic
(morphologically different) generations. |:
They have a dominant independent free

living gametophyte. This may be thalloid
as in many liverworts or is differentiated
into structures resembling to stem,
leaves and absorbing and _ anchoring
organs, rhizoids, as in mosses and some
liverworts. The gametophyte produces a
sporophyte, which is a less conspicuous
generation, partially or totally dependent
upon the gametophyte for its nutrition.
The sporophyte generally consists of foot, seta and capsule. The sporophyte is diploid (2n) which
produces in sporangia one kind of haploid spores (i.e. it is homosporous) by meiosis.

G) V: 1.1

Fig 9.2 Mosses often grow at wet places as seen
here in a small water fall

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

The spores germinate and give
rise to gametophyte which is also WVajeel-jatellulea
haploid. Multicellular male and
female sex organs i.e. antheridia
and archegonia respectively, are
bornongametophyte either onsame
or different plants. These sex organs
are multicellular and protected by a
sterile covering of cells (Fig. 9.3).

Gametes are produced by mitosis.
Male gametes produced within
antheridia are called antherozoids;
antherozoids are motile and always
produced in large number. Female
gametes formed within archegonia
are termed as eggs. A single egg
is formed in each archegonium.
Fertilization takes place in water.
Antherozoids (n) are attracted
towards archegonia(n) chemotactically. Asingle antherozoid fuses with an egg (n)thus accomplishing
fertilization which results in the formation of the diploid zygote (2n). The zygote is retained within the
femalesexorgan(archegonium)forsometime.Afteraresting periodthezygotedevelopsthroughmitotic
divisionsintoadiploidembryo. Theembryoultimatelydevelopsintoasporophytewhichisalsodiploid.

The entire development of sporophyte thus takes place within the gametophyte plant body. Even
when the sporophyte is fully developed it remains attached to the gametophyte for nourishment
and protection because it does not contain chloroplasts and is unable to perform photosynthesis.
There is an alternation of generations in the life cycle of bryophytes i.e. multicellular haploid
gametophytic (gamete producing) generation alternates with the multicellular diploid sporophytic
(Spore producing) generation (Fig. 9.6). It is a very important phenomenon, which provides
continuous genetic variabilities and selection for the best genetic make up for survival and
adaptation in the changing environment(s) (as explained in a later section).

In view of the above mentioned discussion, bryophytes can therefore be defined more precisely as
plants with the distinguishing characters as follows :

(4) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

"Vascular system absent; gametophyte dominant; sporophyte attached to gametophyte;
homosporous.”

ADAPTATION TO LAND HABITAT

In general bryophytes developed the following adaptive characters for terrestrial environment:

1. Formation of a compact multicellular plant body which helped in the conservation of water by
reducing cell surface area exposed to dry land conditions. Presence of cuticle further reduces
loss of water by evaporation.

2. Development of photosynthetic tissues into special chambers for the absorption of carbon
dioxide without losing much water and exposure to light.

3. Formation of special structures like rhizoids for absorption of water and anchorage.

4, Heterogamy (production of two types of gametes) is evolved, forming non motile egg containing
stored food and motile sperms.

5. Gametes are produced and protected by the special multicellular organs (antheridia and
archegonia).

6. Multicellular embryo is formed which is retained and protected inside the female reproductive
body during its development.

7. Alternation of spore-producing generation (sporophyte) with gamete producing generation
(gametophyte) enabled the plant to produce and test the best genetic combinations for adapting
to the versatile terrestrial conditions.

CLASSIFICATION

Bryophytes are divided into three subdivisions : Hepaticopsida, Bryopsida and Anthoceropsida.

G) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Hepaticopsida (Liverworts)
Bryophytes belonging to this subdivision are called liverworts. It includes about 900 species.
Liverworts are the simplest of all bryophytes (Fig. 9.4).

They are usually found on moist rocks and on wet soil. Since they live near water therefore chances
of drying out are greatly reduced.

(a) (b)

Fig 9.4 (a) Marchantia a typical liverwort, the gemma cups functions in asexual
reproduction (b) Porella a leafy liverwort showing lateral antheridia bearing branch

The plant body is a gametophyte. It may be thalloid i.e. flat, or ribbon-like, usually dichotomously
branched. It is attached to soil by means of rhizoids e.g. Marchantia, Other species tend to grow
upright and are falsely leafy i.e., differentiated into a false stem, and leaves e.g., Porella (Fig. 9.4b).
The sporophyte is dependent upon gametophyte! for nourishment and protection.

The sex organs develop on the upper surface of the thallus near the tips of the branches.

Sometimes they develop on special branches on gametophyte called the antheridiophores and
the archegoniophores as in Marchantia (Fig. 9.5).

(6) V: 1.1

a

ae « ~
ay A a |
wee a _ a
Y aillt s i il

Fig. 9.5 A Liverwort, Marchantia bearing sex organs, antheridia and archegonia, on special branches called antheridiophores and
archegoniaphores:

_Archegonia (n) Egg (n)
Plant body (n) ae
PAN Bhalla GAMETOPHYTE
(Gametophyte) —~.. = éygote(en)
—™ Antheridia(n) > Sperm(n) ‘
Mitosis
SPOROPHYTE
MeIOSIs
-Sporesin) - . Sporecyte(2n) ' Sporophyte(2n)

Fig. 9.6 A generalized life cycle of a Bryophyte showing alternation of generation.

9. Kingdom Plantae

Bryopsida

Like liverworts most mosses inhabit damp
places. In contrast to other bryophytes they grow
equally well in fairly dry places. However, water
is essential in the reproduction of mosses, thus
they usually grow to form cushions or mats.

Each adult moss plant, a gametophyte, is always
differentiated into structures which resemble
stem and leaves. Multicellular rhizoids are also
present. Examples of mosses are Funaria and
Polytrichum (Fig. 9.7). Archegonia and antheridia,
develop on the tips of different branches on the
same plant e.g., Funaria, or on different plants
as in Polytrichum. The archegonia and antheridia
form clusters and are mixed with sterile hairs,
the paraphyses.

Formation of diploid sporophyte and haploid
spores follow the same sequence of events of
alternation of generations as in liverworts (Fig.
9.6). However, the spore of a moss, unlike that of
liverworts, developsinto an algalikestructure, the
protonema. Haploid moss plants (gametophyte)
develop from buds on the protonema and the
life cycle is completed (Fig. 9.8).

eLearn.Punjab

Fig 9.7 Polytrichum, a hair cup moss plant

: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Sperm fertilization Zygote Developing

sporophyte in
archegonium

Antheridium

=

: Mature

sporophyte
Eggs y
Archegonium

2n
Male | Female Sporangium Seta
= Meiosis
Gametophytes 9,  Peristome 4 \ Parent
(: toph
Bud a ae Sree
Rhizoid wr a released q
Germinating Spores Operculum Calyptra
spores

Fig. 9.8 Moss life cycle

Anthoceropsida (Horn Worts)

This group of bryophytes differs in many respects and is slightly advanced than Bryopsida and
Hepaticopsida. The gametophyte is highly lobed and irregular in outline. Except for a little early
stage of development, the sporophyte is not dependent upon gametophyte for nourishment
and protection. Antheridia and archegonia are partially sunken in the gametophytic tissue.
The sporophyte exhibit many advanced characters due to which it can thrive better on land as
compared to other groups. The sporophyte has stomata and chloroplasts in the epidermis and can
thus photosynthesize its own food rather than obtaining it from gametophyte. It also has a waxy
cuticle to check excessive loss of water (desiccation). Furthermore, at the junction of foot and spore
producing region there is a band of meristematic tissue. This tissue keeps on adding cells towards
the spore-producing region during the formation, maturation and dispersal of spores from the
Opposite end. Due to the fast growth rate of this meristematic tissue the sporophyte keeps on

(@) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

increasing in length for an indefinite period of time. Due to these characters the sporophyte
continues to survive as such even after the death and decay of the gametophyte. One good example
of Anthoceropsida is Anthoceros which is also found in the hilly areas of Pakistan (Fig. 9.9)

Capsule

Seta

(b)

Fig. 9.9 Anthoceros, a hornwort (a) Gametophyte with attached horn-shaped sporophyte (b) V.S. of sporophyte.

Alternation of generations

In the life history of liverworts, mosses and hornworts there are two distinct multicellular phases
or generations. These generations are haploid gametophyte and diploid sporophyte, which
regularly alternate with each other. The gametophyte is the dominant generation because it is more
conspicuous. It produces gametes called spermatozoids or antherozoids and eggs, therefore
called gamete-producing generation. A haploid spermatozoid fuses with a haploid egg to produce
diploid oospore.

The oospore does not produce the gametophyte directly but produces a totally different plant
called sporophyte. The sporophyte in bryophytes is a less conspicuous generation, which is usually
differentiated into foot, seta and capsule (also called sporogonium). Spores develop within the
capsule by reduction division (meiosis) from spore mother cells. The sporophyte produces spores
and is, therefore, called spore producing generation. The spore on germination does not develop

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

into a sporophyte but gives rise to the gametophyte. Thus in the life-history of a bryophytic plant,
the two generations, the gametophyte and the sporophyte, regularly alternate with each other. The
phenomenon of alternation of gametophyte and sporophyte in the life history of a plant is called
alternation of generations (Fig. 9.10).

Sporophyte
(multicellular
diploid)

2n

() Me Haploid Gametes in) =
(ny y ~~ SU Haploid
= / Gametophytey _ Spores

| (multicellular | Mitosis
Mitosis  \ haploid) |

Fig. 9.10 graphic representation of the alternation of gametophytic and sporophytic generetior

It should be noted that the gametophyte or haploid stage begins with spores and ends at gametes,
whereas the sporophyte begins with oospore and ends at spore mother cell.

The significance of alternation of generations

During the formation of spores from spore mother cells by meiotic division reshuffling of genes
occurs. As a consequence, a great variety of spores with different genetic make-up are produced.
These spores in turn produce gametophytes with different genetic combinations. The gametophytes
with better genetic make-up will have a better chance for survival in the environment where
they occur. On the other hand, the gametophytes with less advantageous characteristics will be
eliminated. There is no reshuffling of genes during gametogenesis in the gametophyte as gametes
are produced after mitosis.

The oospore developing after fertilization now has a new genetic make-up as compared to the

(11) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

parent. This genetic variation passes to the new sporophyte which on maturity once again produces
further genetic recombination which are transferred to the gametophyte. In this natural process
the sporophyte thus provide a large amount of genetic variability and nature selects the best
genetic combinations. In the long run, this will allow the populations to become increasingly better
adapted to their environment.

DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA

Tracheophytes are called vascular plants because of the presence of vascular tissues i.e. xylem and
phloem.These are the successful group of land plants. They are able to adapt the rough land habitat
most successfully and amongst them the flowering plants today have dominated land habitat. The
evolution of following complex vegetative and reproductive characteristics enabled the vascular
plants in general and flowering plants specifically to become predominant flora of land:

Root, stem and leaves.

Vascular systems in stems, roots and leaves.

Protected sporangia, leading to the evolution of seed.

Pollen tube for safe and water-independent transmission of male gamete to female gamete.
Flower and fruit.

Heteromorphic alternation of generation.

Au RFWN >

The Tracheophytes are further sub-divided into four sub-divisions, Psilopsida, Lycopsida,
Sphenopsida and Prteropsida.

PSILOPSIDA (PSILOPHYTA)

In Psilopsida plants have rootless sporophytes. The stem is differentiated into an underground
rhizome and an aerial part. Both are dichotomously branched. The rhizome bears rhizoids,
both perform the function of root. The aerial branches are green, leafless and bear small veinless
outgrowths and carry out photosynthesis. The reproductive organs of sporophyte are sporangia
which develop at the tips of long or short branches, or on lateral sides of branches (Fig. 9.11).

(12) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Internal structure of stem is simple. Vascular tissue is narrow, central and soild without pith, with
a broad cortex.

Psilopsida is considered to be the earliest group of vascular plants. Most of the representatives of
this group have become extinct, for example, Horneophyton, Psilophyton, Cooksonia (Fig. 9.11)
etc.

(b)

Fig. 9.11 Psilotum
(a) Dichotomously leafless branches.
(b) The erect branches of another species, showing brown sporangia.

There are only two living genera Psi/lotum, and Tmesipeteris.

The gametophyte is thalloid. It is colorless and underground. Its cells contain a fungus which
provides food to the gametophyte and in return gets protection from it. Such beneficial symbiotic
relationship among the two members (fungus and plant) is said to be symbiosis; or mycorrhizal
association. Examples are Psilotum, and Tmesipeteris.

EVOLUTION OF LEAF

Early vascular land plants did not have true leaves or roots. They were small in size, with

(13) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

dichotomously branched erect smooth aerial parts and equally strong subterranean anchoring
and absorptive rhizome.

Compression
fossil of Cooksonia Reconstruction of
approximately 350 coors to ow
ve a
million years ago reproductive parts
a “b

Fig. 9.12 Cooksonia : an early vascular plant bearing sporangia at the tips of the branches.

Cooksonia (Fig. 9.12) had the same structural layout
i.e. naked stem without leaves. Such plants started
to form leaves as small scale like out growths.
These out growths were not supplied with vascular
tissues, therefore they were not regarded as true
leaves. Lycopods were the first plants that formed
the true leaves and roots.

However in lycopods (e.g. Lycopodium) the leaves
are small in size. Each leaf has a single undivided

vein (vascular supply). Such a leaf is called
microphyll. Fig. 9.13 Successive evolutionary steps in the evolution of leaf.

Large leaves having divided veins and veinlets

with an expanded leaf blade or lamina are known as megaphylls. Megaphylls are characteristic
for ferns and seed plants. It is suggested that evolution of megaphylls started from a dichotomous
branching system in some primitive psilopsids approximately 350 million years ago. It is assumed
that evolution of a megaphyll included series of successive evolutionary steps (Fig. 9.13) which are

as follows:
V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Overtopping

The dichotomously branched aerial portion of the stem showed unequal branching. Some branches
remained short while others grew and expanded at a much faster pace. All these branches grew in
different planes. Such an unequal development of various branches is called overtopping.

Planation
Next important step was the arrangement of unequal dichotomies in one plane. This process is
termed as planation.

Fusion/Webbing

Overtopping and planation was followed by a process known as fusion or webbing. The space
between the overtopped dichotomous branches was occupied by a sheet of parenchyma cells
which connected these branches forming a flat lamina or leaf blade type of structure, having many
dichotomously branched veins (Fig. 9.13).

During the course of evolution fusion of the vascular strands resulted in net or reticulate venation
pattern. The process of evolution of leaf was very slow and gradual which completed in more than
15-20 million years.

LYCOPSIDA

The plants of Lycopsida have sporophytes differentiated into roots, stem and true leaves. The
leaves are small and single- veined, they are also called microphylls. The arrangement of leaves is
spiral or opposite. The sporangia develop singly on the upper side of the sporophylls, which may
or may not be arranged to form strobili (Fig. 9.14)

The sporophyte may have sporangia of one kind as in Lycopodium or of two kindsi.e., microsporangia
and megasporangia as in Se/aginella (Fig. 9.15).

(15) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Fig.9.14 Lycopodium: a club moss. The Sporophylls
are clustered at the tips of branches into club-shaped
structures called strobili

Lycopsids are also called club mosses/spike mosses because of their club/spike shaped strobili
and small leaves resembling mosses. On the basis of types of spores produced in the sporophyte
they are thus referred to as being homosporous’ or ‘heterosporous’ respectively. This condition is
called homospory and heterospory. Selaginella resembles seed producing plants (spermatophytes)
because of its heterosporic condition and some other characters. The gametophyte of Lycopsida
is mainly underground.

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

(a) Seo ls ad (D)

sporophylls, b-longitudinal section of strobilus of Selaginella showing mega and
microsporangia.

SPHENOPSIDA

In Sohenopsida (Horsetails), the sporophyte is differentiated into root, stem and leaves. The leaves
may be expanded or scale-like and are always arranged in whorls. Plants belonging to this group are
also called arthrophytes because the whole plant body is composed of large number of joints. Main
stem is not smooth, it has large number of ridges and furrows. Each node has whorl of branches.
The sporangia are born on structures called sporangiophores, aggregated to form strobili.

Each sporangiophore has a slender stalk and an expanded disc at its free end. The sporangia appear

on the underside of the disc. The thalloid gametophytes grow upon clayey soil and on mud, e€.g.,
Equisetum (Fig. 9.16).

(17) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 9.16 Representative of three of the subdivisions of vascular plants (a) club moss Lycopodium (b) A horsetail. Equisetum (c) A tree

fern.

PTEROPSIDA

Pteropsida is divided into three classes (i) class Filicineae (ii) class Gymno spermae (iii) class
Angiospermae. The class Filicineae contains seedless plants with foliar sporangia (sporangia
attached to fronds Fig. 9.17). The leaves are called fronds. When the frond is immature and young,
it is coiled, this pattern of development is called circinate vernation (Fig. 9.19). It is an important
character of this group.

Fig. 9.17 A frond bearing sporangia attached to the underside Fig. 9.18 Fems. A ostrich fem growing ona forest floor. See the
of the leaf. coiled immature and young frondsready to uncoil.

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Class Filicineae

The Filicineae or fems are mostly shade and moisture loving plants. A very few are able to live
under dry conditions. They grow on the hills and in plains. Some are epiphytic and grow on the bark
of trees. Although ferns are worldwide in distribution, they are especially abundant in the tropics.
They vary greatly in size. Important ferns are Dryopteris, Pteridium, Adiantum and Pteris etc.

Adiantum (Maiden-hairfern)

Adiantum is a fem that grows along moist walls and water courses. It is a small herb consisting of
stem, roots and leaves. Stem is a short, thick and underground, usually unbranched horizontally
growing rhizome. The rhizome is protected by brownish scales (ramenta) and covered by persistent
leaf basis. Fibrous adventitions roots arise from the lower side of the rhizome. Large, pinnately
compound fronds arise from the upper side of rhizome. Young leaves (fiddle heads) show circinate
vernation. The stipe (stalk) and rachis are black, smooth, shiny (hence called maiden hair fem).
The leaflets (pinnae, and pinnules - leaflets of second order) show dichotomous venation. Sori
(groups of sporangia) are born on the underside of reflexed lobes of the margins of leaflets, and
are protected by bent margin of the leaflet, forming false indusium.

Life Cycle : Life cycle of Adiantum shows hetromorphic alternation of generation, sporophyte
being dominant and gametophyte small and reduced but separate and independent. The diploid
sporophyte produce large number of sori (singular-sorus).They are green, but when ripe they
become dark brown. Each sorus consists of anumber of sporangia covered by false indusium. The
leaves bearing sporangia are called sporophylls.

Each sporangium is slightly flattened, biconvex body (capsule) born on a multicellular stalk. The
capsular wall consists of a single layer of flat, thin walled cells. The edge of the capsule is made up
of two parts, the annulus and the stomium. The annulus occupies three fourth of the edge and
remaining one fourth is the stomium. Annular cells have their radial and inner walls thickened.
The stomial cells are thin- walled. Inside the sporangia, haploid spores are formed by reduction
division, from diploid spore mother cells. The annulus of the sporangium contracts in dry weather,
the stomial cells being thin-walled rupture and spores are dispersed by wind.

When a spore falls on a moist soil, it germinates at a suitable temperature and produces a haploid
gametophyte or prothallus.

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Archegonium
a (n)
P ee a9 \ Zyqgote (2n)
LL
Gametophyte :
—

(n)

Antheridium . em a
Stomium a Sporangium (n) mitotic division (2n]
‘ Pinnules
Stalk
oo Embryo (2n)
Sorus/ SS, ©
(cluster of — Leaf of young
. sporophyte
sporangia) Gamstophyte
Rachis
Rhizom
Apical notch
Sporopohyte (2n) Adventitious
roots

Fig. 9.19 Life history of Adiantum

The prothallus (gametophyte) is an autotrophic, small, flat, heart shaped structure. At the anterior
end of the prothallus is a notch in which lies the growing point. Its size is about 8mm at its longest
diameter. It is horizontally placed on the soil, and has unicellular rhizoids on its lower surface
towards the posterior end. The rhizoids fix the prothallus to the soil and absorb nutrients for it. It
is composed of rounded thin walled cells. The margin of the prothallus is one-celled thick but the
middle part is many-celled and is cushion-like.

The prothallus is monoecious i.e., male and female sex organs appear on the under-surface of the
same prothallus. In the mature prothallus, archegonia occur near the notch and the antheridia are

scattered among the rhizoids.

Each antheridium produces numerous spermatozoids which are spirally coiled andmulticiliated..

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

The arcnegonium consists of a venter and a neck. The venter contains the egg or oosphere and is
embedded in the cushion of the thallus. The antherozoids reach the archegonium, by swimming
in water, Fertilization occurs and an oospore is formed. The oospore forms the sporophyte. Young
sporophyte is first attached to the gametophyte but later becomes independent. The life history of
this fern is shown in Fig 9.19.

EVOLUTION OF SEED HABIT

A review of the kingdom Plantae indicates that the seed-plants (spermatophytes) predominate
over non-seed vascular plants.

One of the most significant events in the history of land plants’ was the development of seed
habit. It was an important change in the reproductive system of the vascular plants which occurred
approximately 390 million years ago. First complete seeds appeared approximately 365 million
years ago during late Devonian times. Technically a seed may be defined as a fertilized ovule. An
ovule is an integumented indehiscent megasporangium. Integuments are specialized protective
coverings around megasporangium which vary in number. All seed producing plants are called
spermatophytes. Various steps involved in the evolution of seed habit are as follows.

Evolution of heterospory.

Retention and germination of megaspore within the megasporangium.
Development of protective layers around megasporangium.

Reduction to a single functional megaspore per sporangium.
Development of an embryo sac within the sporangium.

Modification of distal end of megasporangium for pollen capture.

Au RFWN >

1. | Evolution of heterospory

Primitive vascular land plants produced one kind of spores, a condition called homospory. All groups
of land plants up to pteridophytes are homosporous. During the early phase of evolution some
plant groups started producing two different types of spores, the smaller ones called microspores
and the larger ones known as megaspores.

The microspores produced inside microsporangia germinate to form male gametophyte or the
microgametophyte, whereas the megaspores germinated to form female gametophyte or

(21) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

megagametophyte.

2. Retention and germination of megaspore within the megasporangium
During the usual reproductive cycle in the heterosporous vascular land plants, the megaspores
are used to be shed and dispersed soon after their formation in order to germinate into female
gametophyte. However in some plants (e.g. Selaginella) the megaspore is not allowed to escape
from megasporangium immediately after its formation. In others the megaspore is permanently
retained within the megasporangium. Here, within the confines of the megasporangium wall the
megaspore germinates to form egg containing female gametophyte.

3. Development of protective layers around megasporangium

Some branch like structures of sporophyte surrounding the megasporangium fused around to
megasporangium to form protective envelope or integument. The megasporangium tightly locked
by integuments becomes totally indehiscent. This important change led to the evolution and
formation of the ovule, which is nothing but an integumented indehiscent megasporangium. In
this way more protection is accorded to the egg-containing apparatus in terrestrial environment.

4. Reduction to a single functional megaspore per sporangium

Each megaspore mother cell within a megasporangium used to produce four gametophytes. There
was a competition for space and food among the four gametophytes. Soon the early vascular
plants adopted a new Strategy i.e., only one megaspore is selected for further development into a
healthy female gametophyte while the remaining three are aborted.

5. Development of an embryo sac within the sporangium
The single healthy megaspore retained within the megasporangium germinates to form an egg
containing female gametophyte called an embryo sac.

6. Modification of distal end of megasporangium for pollen capture

When most of the structural and functional changes leading to the development of seed habit were
completed, another important modification took place in the megasporangium which was now
integumented, indehiscent and permanently attached to - the sporophyte. The distal end of the
megasporangium became modified for capturing pollen (microspore containing male gametophyte).

Pollen after being trapped in the distal cavity of the megasporangium produces pollen tube which
carry male gametes deep into the embryo sac to fertilize the egg, forming a zygote, that forms an
embryo. The megasporangium (ovule) after fertilization is transformed into a seed, the integuments

(22) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

becoming the seed coats.. The seed offers maximum degree of protection to a developing embryo
under the unfavorable terrestrial environment. The development and evolution of seed habit was
a great success and a giant leap which ultimately enabled Plants to colonize land permanently.

Class Gymnospermae

Gymnosperms are one of the successful groups of seed plants of worldwide distribution They
constitute about one-third of the world’s forests. The gymnosperms are heterosporous plants which
produce seeds but no fruits. The term gymnospermae literally means ‘naked seeded’ (Gymno=
naked, spermae= seed). The ovules in these plants are usually borne on the exposed surfaces of
fertile leaves (megasporophylls). These ovules, unlike those of angiosperms are not enclosed but
lie naked on the surface of fertile leaves.

Like Filicinae, they show regular heteromorphic alternation of generations. They have independent,
dominant sporophyte but less conspicuous, dependent gametophyte. The female gametophyte is
permanently retained within the ovule. The two kinds of spores are microspores and megaspores
which develop on microsporophylls and megasporophylls respectively. The megasporophylls
bearing ovules are not folded and joined at the margins to form an ovary. For this reason the seeds
lie naked on the mega sporophylls, (Fig. 9.20a).

The important genera are Cycas (Sago-palm) (Figs. 9.20-a), Pinus (Pine), Taxus (Yew), Picea (Hemlock)
and Cedrus (deodar) Gink, o (Fig. 9.20-b) etc.

|

I

-

Fig 9.20(a) Cycas tree-habit and general
organography

Fig 9.20 (b) Ginkgo biloba

(23) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Pinus- Life Cycle

The Pine is a conifer. The main plant body is sporophyte which produces spores after reduction
division of spore mother cellin sporangia. Conifers are heterosporous. Microspores and megaspores
are produced in microsporangia and megasporangia respectively. Sporangia (i.e., micro and
megasporangia) are produced on respective cones (male cones and female cones) on the same
plant.

The male cones are small in size and are produced in clusters on an axis. Each male cone consists
of microsporophylls which contain microsporangia. Microspore germinates to form a small
inconspicuous male gametophyte (also called as microgametophyte) within the spore wall. Such a
microspore of seed plants that contains the microgametophyte including the gametes is called a
pollen grain (Plural = pollen).

Pollen are produced in great numbers and are transported by wind. Pollen grain in Pinus has
two wings attached to its lateral sides. Due to wings, pollen can float in air for a longer period of
time and ean travel long distances. The gymnosperms have successfully evolved this totally new
mechanism of transfer of male gamete to the female gametophyte through wind which has made
them independent of water for this purpose. This is an important improvement and evolutionary
adaptation to survive in the harsh dry terrestrial (land) environment.

The female cones are large and conspicuous. Each female cone is composed of large number of
Spirally arranged scales, the megasporophylls which are woody in texture. At the base of each
scale two ovules are present. An ovule is actually a megasporangium which is protected by an
integument. Each megasporangium has a single diploid megaspore mother cell. The megaspore
mother cell divides meiotically to produce four haploid megaspores. The functional megaspore (n)
undergoes mitosis to produce female gametophyte or an embryo sac. The embryo sac contains
one to several archegonia. The archegonia contain the female gamete or an egg.

During pollination the pollen land directly on the ovules. Only few pollen are able to germinate to
form pollen tubes through which male gametes are transferred to the embryo sac for fertilization.
More then one egg can be fertilized to form several zygotes, but one zygote usually survives to form
a single embryo. After fertilization the ovule becomes the seed. The seeds now contains an embryo
along with some stored food material. The seed upon germination gives rise to a new sporophyte
plant.

In the life cycle of Piuns, the dominant diploid sporophyte generation alternates with inconspicuous

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

haploid gametophyte generation (Fig. 9.21).

Wing Scale
Seed

Megaspore ollinatio

Pollen
tube 9)
Fertilization Loeaeettion
(15 months after
Pollen Collination) Saat showing

Meiosis |

— Microspores

Meiosis > _ Microspore 2n
z mother el

Megaspore Pollen-bearing
mother ce

\ =i a Of

cone, showing"

Sore Bo Pine
Cross-section of
cone, showing scales

seed
Ovulate “he 4
(seed-bearing) SPorephyte = Seedling
cone

Fig.9.21 Life Cycle of Pinus

Class Angiospermae

The term angiosperms literally means “enclosed seeded” (Angio=close Sperm = seed). In these
plants fertile leaves bearing ovules are folded and joined at the margins to form ovaries. The ovary
after fertilization is changed into a fruit, containing seeds.

Angiosperms make up 235,000 of the 360,000 known species of plants. They are heterosporous,

autotrophic plants. These are highly evolved of all the plants on the earth. The plants produce
flowers, fruits and seeds.

(25) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

(b)

Fig. 9.22 Some of the remarkable diversity of angiosperms is shown in these photographs. The species shown here are Dicots (a)
Fragrant water lily, (b) wild geranium, (c) Indian pipe (a parasite) an angiosperm that lacks chlorophyll.

Life Cycle of an angiospemic plant

The adult plant is a diploid sporophyte mostly differentiated into roots, stem and leaves. At maturity
it produces flowers. A flower is a modified shoot which consists of a pedicel, thalamus or torus, and
floral leaves (Sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). Thalamus and floral leaves, especially the stamens
and the carpels, are so modified, that they do not even look like stem and leaves respectively. The
sepals and petals are non- essential or non-reproductive parts, and stamens and carpels are the
essential or reproductive parts of the flower.

The sepals and the petals protect the stamens and the carpels. They also attract insects for
pollination. When the pollination is over, the sepals usually and the petals always fall off.

The anther contain microspore mother cells which produce haploid microspores through meiosis.
Each microspore germinates to produce male gametophyte. Such microspores containing male
gametophytes are called pollen.

The carpel consists of a basal broader part, the ovary, the style and the terminal part of the style,
the stigma. The ovary contains ovules. The ovule consists of an integument (covering) and a tissue,
the nucellus present inside.

After pollination, the pollen grain is transferred to the stigma. Here it germinates to form a pollen
tube. The nucleus of the microspore divides by mitotic divisions to form two male gametes and
the tube nucleus. At this stage of development, the pollen grain is called male gametophyte. In the
meantime certain changes occur in the ovule leading to the formation of female spore (megaspore).
The megaspore develops into female gametophyte. This consists of seven cells only. One of these

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

cells is the egg or oosphere.

The pollen tube grows through the style, enters the ovule and then reaches the female gametophyte.
Here it discharges the male gametes. The egg and one of the two male gametes fuse to form the
oospore. The second male gamete fuses with the secondary nucleus to form endosperm nucleus
(double fertilization). The oospore develops into an embryo and endosperm nucleus develops
into a multicellular nutritive tissue, the endosperm.

Animation 9.2: Angiosperm Reproduction
Source and Credit: amoebasisters

(27) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Seed Formation
Meanwhile, the integuments of the ovule form testa and tegmen and ovary wall develops into the
fruit. Seeds usually undergo a period of rest and then under suitable conditions, germinate and

produce a seedling which gradually changes into a sporophyte (Fig. 9.23).

Thus an alternation of dominant sporophyte generation(2n) occurs with inconspicuous
gametophyte generation(n).

@
@ Pollen grain Tube cell

Stigma =m

Generative ' Sperm nuclei (male gametes) Pollen tube

cell

Tube cell nucleus
by Style } Carpel Male gametes
Ovary Tube neclous
Growth of
pollen tube

Embryo sac
Pollination
Endosperm
(3n}

mh, _- Polar nuclei

Fig. 9.23 Life Cycle of on angiospermic plants

Double Fertilization

Double fertilization is a special process found in Angiosperms. In this two male gametes fuses with
two cells simultaneously. A male gamete (n) fuses with egg (n) to form a diploid zygote (2n) which
develops later into an embryo and second male gamete (n) fuses with another female cell called
fusion nucleus (2n) resulting into a triploid (3n) endosperm cell, which develops into food storing

V: 1.1

endosperm tissue. It is an important evolutionary advancement in which food storage in fertilized
ovule is made only on fertilization i.e. formation of zygote. This actually helps the plant to economize
its food resources.

Animation 9.3: Double Fertilization

Source and Credit: online.science.ps

Classification of Angiosperms
The class Angiospermae is divided into two sub-classes, the Monocotyledonae (with one cotyledon)
and the Dicotyledonae (with two cotyledons), according to the number of cotyledons in the embryo.

The plants included in the Monocotyledonae are called Monocotyledonous plants or Monocots.
The plants included in the Dicotyledonae are called Dicotyledonous plants or Dicots. A few
distinguishing characters of the two classes are given below:

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 9.24 Comparison of Dicot and Monocot

Dicot
Numbers of cotyledo ns
in seed
Manocot N
4 or 5 petals,
or multiples
Numbers of petals or i aldors
sepals 3 patals,
4 J sepals, or
multinies of 3
, Bund
Location and arrangement ips
of vascular tissue in the ring borg ie
Bundles hire ges

stem

scattered ty,

Patterns of veins
in leaf

Presence or absence of
wood

symmetry of the accessory
parts of the flower

Regular Inrequiar

Individual or united petals

Separate
petals

Relative position of male
and female flower parts

Superior ovary inferior ovary Superior ovary Inferior ovary

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Angiospermic Familes

Some Angoispermic families are described below :

1. Rosaceae (Rose family). 2. Fabaceae (Pea family).

3. Mimosaceae ( Acacia family). 4, Solanaceae (Potato family).

5. Caeselpiniaceae {Cassiafamily). 6. Poaceae (Grass family).
ROSACEAE (Rose Family):

A family with about 100 genera and 2000 species is distributed over most of the earth. In Pakistan
29 genera and about 213 species are reported.

Familiar Plants: Pyrus (pear); Rosa (rose); Malus (apple); Fragaria (strawberry) etc.


9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 9.25 Rosaceae : A-twig; B-young stamen; B1-enlarged open anther, showing pollen in it; C-style hairy and stigma bilabiate; C1-

enlarged bilabiate stigma.
(32) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Vegetative Characters

Plants are trees, shrubs and herbs. Stem of the shrubby plants usually have spines. Leaves are
alternate, rarely opposite, simple or compound, with paired stipules, which are sometimes adnate
to the petiole; spines may also occur on the rachis.

Floral Characters

Inflorescence is variable, solitary or may be racemose or cymose cluster. Flowers are mostly bisexual,
and actinomorphic, often perigynous to some degree, usually showy and scented. Calyx: 5 sepals
rarely 4, united at the base. Corolla: Petals 5, or numerous in multiple of 5, which are free rosaceous,
large and showy. Androecium: Numerous stamens, sometimes only 5 or 10. Gynoecium is of 1
to numerous separate carpels or variously united, ovary generally superior sometimes inferior;
Placentation basal, when the carpel is one or apocarpous, but axile when the carpels are many
and syncarpous (fused).

Economic !mportance : Economic importance of this family is great in providing the pleasure and
welfare to mankind. The members of this family are important in temperate regions for fruit and
ornamentals. Perhaps they rank third in commercial importance in the temperate zone among the
families of flowering plants.

Important fruits are Apple, Pear, Peach, Almond, Apricot, Strawberry, etc.

A large number of plants are ornamental and are grown in gardens for their beautiful and scented
flowers. The most widely cultivated genus for decorative purpose is Rosa, Rose which has been
grown in gardens since ancient times and whose named cultivars are now numbered in thousands.
Many other genera are also grown for their beautiful flowers in the parks and gardens.

The branches of Crataegus provide excellent walking sticks and wood. The wood of Pyrus pastia is
used for making tobacco pipes.

In Asian countries the petals of common rose usually called gulabs are used in making gulkand,
and are also used in extraction of an essential oil (rose oil) used as perfume, when distilled with
water the petals give Rose-water or Ark-Gulab, which is used for curing eye disease, and for many
other purposes.

SOLANACEAE: Night Shade or Potato Family
It is family of about 90 genera and 2000 species of tropical and temperate distribution. In Pakistan
14 genera and about 52 species are reported, Nasir (1985).

(33) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Familiar Plants: Solanum tuberosum (Potato), Nicotiana tabacum (Tobacco), Lycopersicum esculentum
(Tomato), Capsicum frutescens (Red pepper).

Vegetative Characters : Plants including in this family are herbs, shrubs, sometimes trees or vines.
Stem is hairy or prickly. Leaves are alternate or rarely becoming opposite in the floral region,
simple, petiolate, rarely sessile.

Fig. 9.26 Solanaceae : Solarium nigrum, A - twig, B-Flower C-fruit, D-seed

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Floral Characters

Inflorescence: Typically an axillary cyme or combination of cyilies, sometimes helicoids, or
axillary umbellate cymes. Flowers: Mostly bisexual, usually actinomorphic or weakly zygomorphic,
hypogynous, usually pentamerous. Calyx: United 5 sepals, usually persistant. Corolla: United 5
petals, corolla rotate to tubular. Androecium: Stamens 5, free but inserted on the corolla tube
(epipetalous) rarely stamens 4 and didynamous (arranged in two whorls of 2 each). Gynoecium:
A compound pistil of 2 united carpels; ovary obliquely placed, superior, bilocular, or imperfectly
4-locular by false septum; Placentation axile.

Economic !mportance : Members of the family Solanaceae provides drugs and food, some are
weedy, some are poisonous, and others are handsome ornamentals. The most important plant
in the family is Solanum tuberosum (Potato-white or Irish Potato). In Ireland people are completely
dependent on Potatoes.

Lycopersicum esculentum (tomato), the favorite home garden vegetable, was once believed to be
poisonous.

Other important food plants are Solatium metangena (egg plant or brinjal). The fruit of Capsicum
annum and Capsicum frutescens are rich in vitamin C and A, are used as condiment. Physalis (Ground-
Cherry) produces an edible fruit enclosed in a bladder like persistent calyx, the husk, giving the
name husk tomatoe.

Another plant of great commercial value is Nicotiana tabacum the leaves of which are dried and
made into tobacco, which is used in making cigarettes. Many members of this family yield powerful
alkaloids, e.g. Atropa belladona, Datura which are rich in atropine and daturine respectively are
used medicinally.

Many plants are cultivated in the gardens for their beautiful flowers, these includes Petunia,
Nicotiana, Cestrum and Solanum etc.

FABACEAE: (Papilionaceae) Pea Family

A family of about 400 genera and 9000 species, the members of this family occurs all over the
world, but particularly in the warm temperate regions. In Pakistan about 82 genera and about 587
species have been reported.

Familiar Plants: Lathyrus odoratus (Sweet pea), Arachis hypogea (Peanut), Cicer arietinum (Chick

Pea) and Dalbergia sissoo (Shisham).
(35) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Vegetative Characters : Habit: Trees shrubs or herbs. Stem: Herbaceous, or woody or climber
by tendrils (wiry, coiled thread like structures). Leaves: Compound or rarely simple, sometimes
partially or completely modified into tendrils, alternate, stipulate; stipules mostly leafy.

Tt

bee
IWS

Y

hi

Ll

—
N=
' =

=
<——_

Fig. 9.27 Fabaceae (Papilionaceae): Sesbania sesbar; A-twig; B-flower; B71 standard verillium; C-fruit a legume; D-carpel

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Flora! Characters : Inflorescence: Racemose or solitary axillary. Flowers: Bisexual, zygomorphic,
bracteate, pedicellate, perigynous, pentamerous and papilionaceous. Calyx: 5 sepals, more or
less united in a tube, mostly hairy. Corolla: Papilionaceous; petals 5, usually clawed, dissimilar;
the upper posterior petal is large and conspicuous and is called standard or vexillum, 2-lateral
ones free called wings and 2 anterior inner most that fuse to form a boat-shaped structure called
the keel or carina. Androecium: Stamens 10, mostly diadelphous (united by their filaments in 2
groups), 9 fused to form a sheath round the pistil, while 10th posterior one is free. Gynoecium:
A simple pistil, 1- carpeled, with 1-locule; ovary superior; ovary and style long, style bent at is bar,
placentation (mono carpellary) marginal. Fruit: Usually a legume or pod, showing a great variety
of form in various species.

Economic Importance : The family is of considerable importance as a source of high- protein
food, oil, and forage as well as ornamentals and other uses. Main importance lies in the pulses,
belonging to this family, which are used as food, some important and common species of pulse
yielding plants are: Gram, Pea, Kidney bean. These pulses are rich in protein contents.

Medicago sativa Alfafa is one of the world’s best forage crop for horses. Vicia, Melilotus and Trifolium
are also cultivated as main fodder crops. Many trees of this family provide excellent timber for
building, furniture and fuel. Main timber plants are Butea, Dalbergia etc.

Seeds of Arachis hypogea peanut are edible and also used for extraction of peanut oil which after
hydrogenation is used as a vegetable oil. Indigo dyes are obtained from Indigofera tinctoria and
Butea monosperma, yielding yellow dye from flowers.

Many plants of this family are important for medicines: these include Glycyrrhiza glabra for
cough and cold, and Clitoria tematea is used against snake bite. The red and white seeds of Abrus
precatorious are used by jewellers as weights called “ratti”. Some important ornamental plants
include Lathyrus, Lupinus, Clitoria, Butea etc.

CAESALPINIACEAE: Cassia Family
This family includes about 152 genera and about 2300 species. In Pakistan the family is represented

by 16 genera and about 60 species.

Familiar Plants: Tamarinaus indica, Cassia fistula, Bauhinia veriegata.

(7) V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

3 a ra

Ny |
=\¢ be
< Vd
\ cS

yy I
= A I
ae

La
a Ly)

-

Fig. 9.28 Caesalpiniaceae : Cassia senna; A twig, B-flower; C-fruit

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Vegetative Characters Habit: Mostly trees or shrubs, some are woody climbers; rarely herbs. Stem:
Erect, woody, herbaceous, or climbing. Leaves: Compound, pinnate, very rarely simple, stipulate

Floral Characters : Inflorescence: Axillary or terminal raceme or panicle or spikes, rarely cymose;
showy. Flowers: Bisexual, zygomorphic, rarely actinomorphic, perigynous. Calyx: Sepals 5, free or
connate at base, often colored. Corolla: Mostly 5 petals, free. Androecium: Stamens 10 or fewer,
rarely numerous, free or variously united. Gynoedum: A simple pistil 1-carpel; ovary superior,
unilocular; placentation marginal; stigma simple. Fruit: Legume

Economic Importance : The family is of great importance. Some plants are ornamental, some
have medicinal importance, a few have food and other values.

The leaves of Cassia alata are used to cure ring worm and skin diseases. Cassia senna and C. obovata
are cultivated for the leaves which yield the drug Senna, which is the base for a laxative. Oil extracted
from the seeds of Cynometera cauliflora is applied externally for skin diseases.

Common ornamental plants are Bauhinia variegata (Kachnar), Cassia fistula (Amaltas), Parkinsonia,
etc.

The leaves and flower’s bud of Bauhinia variegata are used as vegetable. The acidic fruit of Tamarindus
indica are edible and are rich in tartaric acid. The bark of Bauhinia and Tamarindus indica is used in
tanning. The heartwood of Haematoxylon (Longwood) yield the dye Haematoxylin.

MIMOSACEAE: Mimosa or Acacia Family :
A family of about 56 genera and about 2800 species. In Pakistan it is represented by 11 genera and
49 species, of these only 4 genera and 18 species are native and rest are introduced.

Familiar Plants: Acacia nilotica , Albizzia lebbek, Mimosa pudica Touch me not, Prosopis glandulosa,
P, cineraria.

Vegetative Characters : Habit: Mostly trees or shrubs, rarely climbers or herbs. Most of them
are xerophytes. Stem: Mostly woody. Leaves: Pinnate by compound, alternate, stipulate, stipules
modified into thorns.

Floral Characters : Inflorescence: Spike like or head or umbel, rarely racemose or globose umbels.
Flowers: Bisexual, Actinomorphic, hypogynous to slightly perigynous, bracteate. Calyx: Usually

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

sepals 5, generally fused, toothed or lobed. Corolla: petals 5, free or fused; corolla lobed.
Androecium: Stamens 5 to numerous, free, or adnate to the base of corolla. Gynoecium: A simple
pistil of 1 carpel, ovary unilocular, superior; ovules many, placentation marginal. Fruit: A legume
dehiscent or indehiscent.

Economic Importance : Many trees of this family including species of Acacia, Albizzia and Xylia
provide commercially important wood, which is used for construction purpose or for furniture or
as a fuel. The wood of Albizzia lebbek is used in cabinet work, and railway carriages.

Arabic gum is obtained from Acacia nilotica and A. Senegal. Katha a dye is obtained from Acacia
catechu. The tender leaves of Accacia nilotica are used as blood purifier.

Some common garden plants grown for their beautiful flowers are Mimosa pudica and Acacia
melanoxylon. A few species of Prosopis are planted in the arid zones for breaking the wind pressure.

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 9.29 Mimosaceae : P rosopsiscineraria; A-twig, B-infloresence; C-flower; -D-fruits

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

POACEAE: (Gramineae) Grass Family
Distributed throughout the world wherever vascular plants can survive. It includes about 600
genera, 10,000 species. In Pakistan it is represented by 158 genera and 492 species.

The traditional family name Gramineae takes its name from the Latin Grammar which was used as a
‘generic’ name for certain grasses, is permitted by the International Code of Binomial Nomenclature,
which also provides for the use of Poaceae, based upon the type genus Poa Linn.

Familiar Plants: Triticum vulgare, Wheat; Zea mays, Com; Avena sativa, Oats; Oryza sativa, Rice;
Bambusa, Bamboo; Saccharam officinarum Sugar Cane etc.

Vegetative Characters : Habit: Annual or perennial, herbs. Stem: Jointed usually hollow, at the
internodes, closed at the nodes. Leaves: Solitary at the nodes, sometimes crowded at the base of
the stem, alternate, exstipulate, ligulate, mostly sessile, leaf-base mostly sheathing, simple.

Inflorescence: Mostly compound composed of units called spikelets which are variously arranged
(indense clusters as in wheat, compound spike, or loosely on branched axis-as in oats , spikelets
consisting of bracts, arranged along a slender axis (called rachilla) the two lower bracts (called
glumes) which are empty; the succeeding lemmas enclosing a flower and opposed by a hyaline
scale called palea. The Whole (lemma, palea, and flower) termed as floret; the glumes or lemmas
often bearing one or more stiff bristles (called awns); this basic pattern of spikelet structure is
consistent throughout the family. Spikelets of grasses vary widely in different genera, particularly
as to number of fertile florets in each, and deposition of sexes with them.

Flowers: Usually bisexual, sometimes unisexual, small and inconspicuous, sessile, bracteate,
incomplete, zygomorphic, hypogynous. Perianth: Absent or represented by 2, (rarely 3), minute
hyaline or fleshy scales called lodicules. Androecium: Stamens 1 to 6, usually 3. with delicate
filaments. Gynoecium: A compound pistil of 3 united carpels, anthers versatale, though only one
is functional free; stigmas usually large feather like. Fruit : Grains or Caryopsis (caryopsis a dry,
indehicent fruit in which fruit wall (pericarp) is completed, fused with seed coat).

Economic lmportance : Economically family Poaceae has greater importance than any other family
of flowering plants. It has great economic importance to both man and animals. Cereals and millets
which constitute the chief food stuff of mankind, belongs to this family. Most of the fodder crops,
which are equally important to domestic animals, also belong to this family.

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

Plants providing food for man includes: Triticum sp. (wheat), Avena sativa (Oats), Zea mays (Corn,
Maize), Oryza sativa (Rice), Hordeum vulgare (Barley), Secale cereale (Rye), Penisetum typhoideum;
Sorghum vulgare etc.

E

Fig. 9.30 Poaceae (Gramineae): Chloris barbata: A nabit; B-spikelet; C-glumes; D-fertile lamma, E-flower; F-fruit;

V: 1.1


9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

The dried stem and leaves of the cereal crops are used as fodder for the cattle. Sugar is obtained
from the juice of Saccharum officinarum (Sugar Cane). Many grasses are used in the lawns e.g.
Agrostis, Poa, Festuca etc. and have ornamental significance.

Bambusa (Bamboo) are used as building material for the thatching huts, making boats, carts, pipes
etc. and the split stem are woven into mats, baskets, fans, hats, course umbrella. Leaves are also
given to horses as a cure of cough and cold etc. Certain grasses yield aromatic oils, e.g. Cymbopogon
citratus (lemon grass) which yield lemon grass oil is used in perfumes and soap industry and for
making infusions. Some species of the grasses are used in making papers.

Ethyl alcohol and many other kind of beverages are also prepared from cereals for example whisky
from Rye, barley, corn and rum molasses from sugar cane. Fibers obtained from the leaves of
Saccharum munja which is used in making ropes.

Animation 9.7: Poaceae
Source and Credit: next.cc

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

EXERCISE

Q1. Fill in the blanks.

(i) The sporophyte is and generation and the gametophyte is
and
(ii) The motile asexual reproductive cells are characteristics of and are called .

(iii) The sexual reproduction is said to be oogamous or heterogamous if the two fusing
gametes are------------------- ;

(iv) In the stem of Monocotyledons the bundles are while in the stem of
Dicotyledons they are

(v) The double fertilization is the characteristic feature of .

(vi) Stem roots and leaves are the parts and flowers, fruits and seeds are
the: parts of the plant.
(vii) is the phenomenon of the production of two kinds of spores in the plants.

(ix) The naked-seeded plants are included in the group
Q.2 Short questions.

(i) (a) | Howare ferns better adapted to life on land than liverworts and mosses?
(6) Which of the following are nutritionally self supporting:
1. Mature liverwort and moss gametophyte.
2. Mature liverwort and moss sporophyte.

(ii) (a) The chances of survival and development of wind-blown pollen grains are much
less than those of spores of Adiantum. Comment on this statement.
(6) Account for the fact that megaspores are large and microspores are small.
(c) What important advances have angiosperms made towards the seed plant life?

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

(iii) Write a note on the alternation of generations.
(iv) | What is the importance of the following?
(i) Seed. (ii) Double fertilization.

(ili) Heterospory.

(vi) Pick and match the following:

(i) Fem sporophyte involves vegetative parts of plants.
(ii) The moss plant is the first cell of soorophyte.

(iii) ©The gamete is the last cell of gametophyte.

(iv) The spores are asexual reproductive cells.

(v) Vegetative reproduction are haploid cells.

(vi) |The oospore is gametophytic generation.

(vii) The gamete is a diploid generation.

(viii) The spore mother cell is the first cell of gametophytes.

(ix) |The spore with naked seeds.

(x) Gymnosperms are the plants divides by reduction division to form

haploid spores.
(vii) Sketch and label a fertile pinnule and a sporangium of Adiantium.
Q.3. Extensive Questions
(i) To what does alternation of generations refer in the plants? Define sporophyte and
gametophyte. With which stage is an adult animal comparable? How are they
reproductively dissimilar?
(ii) What is a seed? Why is the seed a crucial adaptation to terrestrial life?

(ili) Describe evolution of leaf and its importance in vascular plants.

(iv) Disciiss evolution of seed and it significance.

V: 1.1

9. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab

(v)

(vi)

In what way do the flowering plants differ from the rest of the seed plants? What is
the stigma? Is fertilization in angiosperms direct or indirect? From what tissue does

angiosperm fruit develop?

What two classes comprise the angiosperms? How do the two classes structurally
differ from one another? Which class derived from the other? Explain.

- 1.1

CHAPTER

10

Kingdom Animatia

Animation 10.1: Growth and development

ource & Credit: Wikispaces

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

INTRODUCTION

Animalia kingdom includes all the animals. The name animalia is derived from Latin, anima = breath
or soul.

In traditional two-kingdom systems, the multicellular animals were referred to broadly as Metazoa
to distinguish them from one-celled animals, the Protozoa. In this text book we have followed the
five kingdom classification system introduced by Robert Whittaker. In this system of classification
the traditional Protozoa belong to kingdom Protoctista. Kingdom Animalia consists of all animals
which are multicellular, diploid eukaryotic, ingestive heterotrophs and develop from two dissimilar
haploid gametes, a large egg and a smaller sperm. In this chapter we will discuss various groups
and subgroups with details of the phyla in your curriculum.

Virtually all biologists agree that animals evolved from protoctists; however, which protoctists,
when, and in what sort of environments, are questions that are still actively debated.

Table 10.1 The relationship of different phyla discussed in this chapter.

Echinodermata

Chordata Hemichordata Mollusca

Arthropoda
a
Annelida

\ (Nematoda)
Deuterostomes a / Cnidaria

Coelomates Pseudocoelomates Acoelomates

f

Bilateria Radiata Porifera

Aschelminthes Platyhelminthes

Eumetazoa Parazoa

Protoctist ancestors

(@) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

DEVELOPMENT OF COMPLEXITY IN ANIMALS

Although multicellularity is found in all the kingdoms, Fungi, Plantae and Animalia but it has
developed most impressively in animals- their cells are joined by complex junctions, this ensures
control of communications and flow of materials between cells. The animals are a diverse group
distinct in their form. The smallest are microscopic, which are smaller than many protoctists and
the largest today are whalessea mammals, included in phylum Chordata.

The simplest of the animals belong to subkingdom Parazoa (phylum Porifera). These animals lack
tissues organised into organs and have indeterminate shape, and areasymmetrical. The sub kingdom
Eumetazoa includes animals of other phyla. These animals have tissues organised into organs
and organ systems. These include radially symmetrical animals (grade Radiata) and bilaterally
symmetrical animals (grade Bilateria). Grade Radiata includes simplest of the Eumetazoa (phylum
Cnidaria). They are much simpler in their organisation compared to the animals belonging to other
Eumetazoa. Most of the phyla which belong to kingdom Animalia (about 29) belong to subkingdom
Eumetazoa. These animals have been divided into three groups on the basis of presence, absence
or type of body cavity found in them. The animals which do not have a body cavity have been
grouped under Acoelomata. The animals which have a false coelom, the pseudocoele, have been
grouped under Pseudocoelomata. The animals which have a true coelom have been grouped
under Coelomata.

GRADE RADIATA

In this group animals with radial symmetry have been included. All the animals which are included
here are also diploblastic. This is a condition or organization in which the parts of the body are
arranged around a central axis in such a way that any plane passing through the central axis divides
the animal in halves that are almost mirror image of each other e.g. as in cnidaria (coelenterata).
The cylindrical body of a sea-anemone can be cut in two equal halves vertically in any plane.

@) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

GRADE BILATERIA

This group includes animals with bilateral symmetry. In an animal where the right side is
approximately the same as the left side and where there is a distinct anterior end is said to have
bilateral symmetry. The animal can be divided into two equal parts by an imaginary line only in one
plane. In most multicellular animals there is a clearly differentiated head present at the anterior end
and a distinct posterior end. Also there are clearly defined dorsal and ventral surfaces. The animals
belonging to phyla, Platyhelminthes, Nematoda, Annelida, Mollusca, Arthropoda, Echinodermata,
Hemichordata and Chordata are included in this grade. It must be mentioned here that the animals
belonging to phylum echinodermata, have developed bilateral symmetry, as is evident, from the
study of structure of their larvae. However, the adult Echinoderms, have secondarily developed
radial symmetry, due to their special mode of life. All the animals included in grade Bilateria are
triploblastic. These may be acoelomate, pseudocoelomate or coelomate.

Antenor

Central axis

Piane of
symmetry

Ras it Dorsal
ae Plane of
- — symmetry

hiral

ostenor

(b)

Fig. 10.1 (a) Radial (b) Bilateral symmetry

() V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Cleavage or division of the
zygote is spiral and determinate.

During development process the mouth
in these animals arises from the

blastopore or from its anterior margin.

Coelom or body cavity is formed due to

Splitting of mesoderm (schizocoelous).

Mesoderm is derived from cells on
anterior lip of blastopore.

This series proterostomia includes
animals belonging to phyla
aschelminthes (nematoda)
annelida, mollusca and arthropoda

G) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

PROTOSTOME DEUTEROSTOME

Spiral cleavage

ra Coelom. originates

from mesodermal
split

Radial cleavage

\ Blastopore

Primitive
gut

Blastopore

Mesodenn

Coclom originates
from gut
outpouching

Coelom

Coelom
Anus develops

from blastopore ra
— Anus

Mouth develops
from blastopore

a A Mouth

jearthworm)

Aris

Fig. 10.2 Patterns of embryonic development of coelom and of egg cleavage In protostomes and deuterostomes.

Aspiral and determinate cleavage is that in which the lines or planes of cleavage are not symmetrical
between poles instead these are diagonal to the polar axis and produce unequal cells around the
axis of polarity and all the blastomeres have determined role to play in the formations of embryo.
The fate of each blastomere is foretold.

In radial and indeterminate cleavage the planes of cleavage are symmetrical to the polar axis and
produce tiers of cells on top of each other and the fate of each blastomere is not pre-determined.
In some anyone blastomere can produce a complete embryo.

©) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

DIPLOBLASTIC AND TRIPLOBLASTIC ORGANISATION

Diploblastic animals belong to division radiata. The body of these animals consists of two layers
of cells, ectoderm and endoderm. There is a jelly like mesenchyme or mesogloea which in most
cases is non cellular. Diploblastic animals show lesser degree of specialisation and they do not
form specialised organs. There is no special transport system in these animals. Most substances
are distributed within their body by process of diffusion. There is no central nervous system in
these animals. A neuron net is present. These animals have radial symmetry. There is only one
cavity in the body called gastrovascular cavity which has only mouth which serves for the entry
of food and water and also for the removal of wastes along with water. This is known as sac like
digestive system. Diploblastic animals are included in phylum Cnidaria (coelenterate) which would
be discussed in detail later in the chapter.

Triploblastic animals are included in phyla which have been placed in grade bilateria/ The body of
these animals is made from three layers ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm. After embryonic
development these layers in most triploblastic animals are not distinct as separate layers of cells,
but are represented by the structures formed from them. The cells of these animals show greater
degree of specialisation. These have specialised organs and organs systems. Special transport
systemsi.e. blood vascular system is presentin most of the cases. The systems such as integumentary
and nervous develop from ectoderm. Mesodem gives rise to muscular, skeletal and reproductive
systems. Endoderm forms the lining of digestive tract and glands of digestive system, such as liver.
The digestive system is of tube type i.e. having mouth at the anterior end and the anus at the
posterior end. Triploblastic animals may be acoelomate, pseudocoelomate or coelomate.

Acoelomates, Pseudocoelomates and Coelomates
The following account would help to explain the above mentioned terms.

Acoelomates

In phylum Platyhelminthes there is no body cavity or coelom, and the mesoderm forms a loose,
cellular tissue called mesenchyma or parenchyma which fills the space between the ectoderm and
endoderm. It forms a packing around the internal organs of the animals to support and protect
them. Such animals are called acoelomates (Fig. 10.3). In acoelomates the gut is sac-type and there
is NO special transport system. Only excretory system is developed for the transport of excretory
products. This system consists of flame cells, excretory ducts and excretory pores. However the
nervous system is well developed.

@) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Pseudocoelomates

In Aschelminthes the space between the body wall and the digestive tube is called pseudocoelom
(false body cavity). Pseudocoelom is not homologous to true coelom because: it is not lined by
coelomic epithelium. It has no relation with the reproductive and excretory organs. It develops
from the blastocoel of the embryo and it is bounded externally by the muscles and internally by the
cuticle of the intestine. The animals having pseudocoelom are called pseudocoelomates

Coelomates

Coelom is cavity present between the body wall and the alimentary canal and is lined by mesoderm.
The mesoderm splits into outer parietal layer which under lines the body wall and the visceral
layer which covers the alimentary canal and the cavity between them is the true coelom. It is filled
with fluid called coelomic fluid. The animals which possess coelom or true body cavity are called
coelomates e.g. animals from annelids to chordates.

In coelomates gut attains more complexity and neuro-sensory system is well developed along with
excretory system, circulatory system, respiratory and reproductive systems.

Mesoderm
Masodgermal (muscle)

organ am

Ecloderm
Ectoderm —

(mesoderm)

4 Measadeannal

Mosodermal Gul Pseudocoel Gut : organ
organ (andederm) (trom blastocoel) (endoderm) bs erab, srietal ™
Mesoderm
Acoolomate Pseudocoelomale coolomalo

Fig. 10.3 General body plan of acoefomate, pseudocoelomate and coelomate.

PARAZOA

Phylum: Porifera the most primitive animals
The name porifera is derived from Latin porus = pore, ferra = to bear

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

The Porifera are pore-bearing animals, commonly called the sponges. All are aquatic. Out of total
5000 species 150 species live in fresh water while all others are marine.

General Characteristics
These animals are composed of many cells however there is no tissue organization and have
no organs. Sponges lack symmetry. In most sponges the body wall is formed of an outer layer,
pinacoderm, made up of cells called pinacocytes: and an inner layer choanoderm made of flagellated
collar cells called choanocytes. Between these two a

; ; . Scolymastra joubini- a barrel like glass sponge of
layers is present gelatinous mesenchyme which may asntarctica is more than a metre tall.
contain amoeboid cells and spicules or sponging fibres.

The poriferans range in size from few millimeter wide to more than one metre tall. They are
macroscopici.e., can be seen with naked eye. There is a single cavity inside the body, the spongocoel.
In most sponges the spongocoel may be divided into flagellated chambers or canals, lined by
flagellated choanocytes.

Numerous pores are present in the body wall. The pores through which water enters the body are
called ostia, and pore by which the water leaves the body is known as osculum (main opening).
There are no respiratory or circulatory organs.

Since the sponges are sessile, therefore these depend upon the food coming to them along with
water currents brought about by movement of flagella of choanocytes. This includes small animals,
(zooplankton) and plants, (phytoplankton) which constitute about 20% of their food. 80% of their
food consists of detrital organic particles. The food enters the spongocoel cavity through Ostia. The
food is ingested by the flagellated cells, the choanocytes. The waste products either diffuse out of
the sponge directly through the body wall or flow out through osculum.

The adult sponges are stationary, spending their lives attached to the rocks at the bottom or other
Solid objects. However, their larvae are able to move (Swim).

There is no definite nervous system, however neurosensory and neuron cells are probably present
which seem to coordinate the flow of water.

The skeleton is in the form of variously shaped needle-like structures called spicules. These may be
calcareous or siliceous. The bath sponge has a skeleton of spongin fibres. The skeleton is present
among pinacocytes and provides support. Spicules are also present around osculum and ostia.

() V: 1.1

Sponges reproduce both by asexual and sexual methods of reproduction.

The asexual reproduction in sponges is by budding. The buds may be external or internal, The
internal buds are called gemmuies. Both types of buds develop into new sponges.

Some sponge species reproduce sexually.
These are mostly hermaphrodite,
mostly protandrous, i.e. male sex cells
develop first. In some sponges the sexes
are separate. Sperms released in water
are carried to the eggs by amoeboid
cells. Fertilization occurs in mesenchyme &
and zygote is formed. The embryo
development includes blastula and larval »
stages. y

Examples of sponges are:

I. Sycon: It is a typical marine sponge.

li. Leucoselenia: | Asponge that consists of group of erect tubes.

ili. Euplectella: Itis beautiful and delicate soonge made up of glassy framework. It is commonly
called Venus flower basket.

iv. Spongilla: It is freshwater sponge.

Importance

The skeleton of sponges have long been used by man mostly for washing and bathing. Although
many artificial soonges have been made from synthetic material, still the natural sponges are in
demand and is an important industry in many parts of the world. The best commercial sponges
are found in the warm waters of Mediterranean Sea. Sponges have great capacity to absorb water.
They are used in surgical operations for absorbing fluids and blood. They are also used for sound
absorption in buildings.

GRADE RADIATA

Phylum Coelenterata / Cnidaria - Diploblastic Animals

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

The name Cnidaria has been given to this group of animals due to the presence of special cells
called cnidocytes. These cells give rise to nematocysts-the stinging cells, characteristic of this

group.

Cnidarians have double layer organization and are therefore diploblastic having tissue grade
organization and have organs. During the development two germinal layers are formed the outer
ectoderm and inner endoderm from which their bodies are constructed. The ectoderm forms outer
covering and some cells of this layer in most animals give rise to nematocysts while the endoderm
cells become specialized for digestion of food. Between the two layers is a jelly-like mesoglea. In
these animals there is only one cavity which serves as digestive as well as body cavity which is called
gastrovascular cavity or enteron and opens to the outside by only one opening the mouth. So
the animals of this group have sac like digestive cavity.

In coelenterates the arrangement of body parts is in relation to centralized axis (symmetrical). An
object is symmetrical where there is a correspondence in form and arrangement of parts so that
a plane passing through the center divides it into similar halves. The coelenterates have radial
symmetry and are aquatic, found both in marine and freshwater habitats.

The coelenterates range in size from microscopic Hydra to macroscopic, Branchioceranthus, a
hydrozoan polyp that may reach two metres in length. Cnidarians are found in two basic forms
the polyps and the medusae. Polyps are cylindrical animals, which in most cases are nutritive in
function, hence named as gastrozoids. The medusae are umbrella like in form. These are free
swimming. The medusae are involved in sexual reproduction as they have gonads.

The mouth is surrounded by a series of tentacles. These bear stinging cells or nematocysts, which
are organs of defense and offense.

The coelentrates are carnivores and feed upon small organisms which come into contact with
them. These organisms are immobilized by nematocysts and taken into the digestive cavity as food

where it is digested and then distributed by diffusion.

The nervous system is in the form of a network of neuron cells forming an irregular net or plexus
in the body-wall. There is no central nervous system.

Many colonial coelenterates such as corals produce a hard exoskeleton formed of calcium carbonate

@) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

(CaCO,). It is secreted by epidermal cells that take lime from sea water. The skeleton of coral is
responsible for formation of small coral islands or large coral reefs.

Most species are sessile, for example Hydra, Obelia, sea-anemone and corals, while other are free
living and motile e.g. jelly fishes etc. Many live as solitary individuals e.g. Hryda jelly fishes and sea-
anemones and quite a large number are colonial e.g. physalia, vellela etc. A colony is an aggregation
of individuals or zooids that perform different functions for the colony.

In Coelenterates reproduction takes place by asexual as well as sexual means e.g. Hydra reproduces
asexually by the formation of buds on its surface. The bud after some time separate from the
parent and develops into a new individual. In Obelia for example there is asexual as well as sexual
reproduction. It has a kind of zooid known as blastostyle which gives rise to individual zooids called
medusae by asexual method. The medusae when released in water develop reproductive organs
which produce gametes that unite to form zygote from which Obelia colony is again formed.

The life cycle of coelenterates is characterized by the presence
of alternation of generations. There are two generations, one
reproduces by sexual means and the other by asexual means.
Both generations are diploid. Often the two generations consist
of one free-living and one attached stage. Therefore asexual
generation and sexual generation alternate with one another.
This is known as alternation of generations e.g., Obelia.

Polymorphism - A Characteristic Feature of Coelenterates (Cnidaria)
The occurrence of structurally and functionally more than two different types of individuals, called
the zooids within the same organism is called polymorphism.

For example, in Obelia there are feeding individuals, the gastrozooids; the individuals capable of
asexual reproduction only, the gonozooids, blastostyles and free-living or sexually reproducing
individuals, the medusae..

The common examples ofcoelenterates are:

i. Hydra : A freshwater - coelenterate. It exists only in polyp form, therefore
alternation of generations is absent.

@) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

ii. Obelia : A marine colonial that exhibits alternation of generations.

iii. Aurelia (jelly fish) : The polyp is
reduced and medusa is dominant in
jellyfish.

iv. Actinia (Sea anemone) : The body
consists of polyp only, enteron is
divided by large partitions
called mesenteries.

v. Madrepora : The body is covered with
hard calcareous skeleton formed of
calcium carbonate. They are commonly
called corals. The skeleton forms large
coral reefs and even small islands.

Fig. 10.5 Coelenterates (Cnidarians)

@) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Coral reefs

Corals are formed from the secretions produced by specialized polyps that are present in certain
coelenterates. These polyps become covered by stony cups due to hardening of their secretions.
From the mouth of the stony cup a polyp can pass out its tentacle for the purpose of feeding
and withdraw itself where not feeding. Most such Coelenterates are colonial. The stony net-work
or mass of such Coelenterates are called Corals. Living polyps are found on the surface layer of
corals whereas underneath the mass are dead stony

Structures only and there are no polyps inside. The

stony masses that are formed in this way are called

coral reefs. These are mostly formed of calcium

carbonates (lime-stone).

Coral reefs are found in the coastal waters of Florida, West Indies, East Coast of Africa, Australia
and Island of Coral Sea.

GRADE - BILATERIA

Triploblastic animals -The Acoelomates

Phylum: Platyhelminthes -The Flatworms

General Characteristics

The name Platyhelminthes means “flatworms”. The body of these animals is soft and dorsoventrally
compressed.

The Platyhelminthes are triploblastic acoelomates. There is development of a third layer, the
mesoderm, which separates the ectoderm and endoderm. The Platyhelminthes exhibit bilateral
symmetry, and body is unsegmented.

With few exceptions the Platyhelminthes are parasites, mostly endoparasites, i.e., live inside their
hosts. The most common examples are Taenia solium (tapeworm), Fasciola hepatica (liver fluke)
and Schistosoma (blood fluke). The parasites are more common in tropics. Some of these cause
diseases in humans. A few species are free living and found in freshwater, for example Dugesia
(planaria).

V: 1.1

Their size ranges from few millmeters (10 mm in case of Planaria) to several meters (tapeworm).

Much of the body space is taken up by a branching sac type digestive system. The digestive system
is poorly developed in some species or may be absent as in the tape-worms.

The excretory system consists of branching tubes ending in bulb-like cells, the flame cells.

A well developed nervous system is present in Platyhelminthes. It is in the form of either a simple
network of nerves or ganglia. The sense organs are present at the anterior end. Respiratory and
circulatory systems are absent.

The parasitic species absorb nutrients from the hosts. The free-living species (Planaria) feed on
small animals and bodies of dead and decaying animals.

The free-living forms are motile. They move by cilia present on their undersides (Planaria). In
parasitic forms the movement is restricted.

The Platyhelminthes reproduce both by sexual and asexual means of reproduction. Asexual
reproduction is by fission in which the animal constricts in the middle into two pieces, each of
which regenerates the missing part. The sexually reproducing species are hermaphrodite, i.e., both
male and female reproductive organs are present in the same individual. Larval form is sometimes
present.

The common examples of flatworms are:

(i) Dugesia (Planaria) : A free-living flatworms with a ciliated outer surface.

(ii) Fasciola (Liver fluke) : It is an endoparasite in sheep and occasionally in human beings. It has
suckers used for attachment to host tissue. It completes its life cycle in two hosts, a snail, sheep or
man. It lives in the bile duct of its hosts.

(iii) Taenia (Tape worm) : An endoparasite of humans, cattle and pig, that completes its life cycle in
two hosts. The intermediate host is pig or cattle. The body is ribbon-like and divided into segments

called proglottids which contain mainly sex organs. The segments continue to break off and are
passed out from the intestine along with faeces.

(5) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Planarians

Tapeworm

Liver fluke

Fig. 10.6 Example of animals of platyhelminthes.

Adaptations for parasitic mode of life
The parasitic Platyhelminthes have completely adapted themselves to parasitic mode of life by the
development of the following characteristics:

1. The epidermis is absent and there is the formation of resistant cuticle for protection.

2. They have developed adhesive organs, such as suckers and hooks, for attachment to the host.

3. There is degeneration of muscular system and nervous system.

4. The digestive system has become simplified due to increased dependence on host.

5. The reproductive systems are complicated and the ova are produced in huge numbers to ensure
continuity of the species.

6. The complexity of life cycle and presence of more than one host during the life cycle is also an
important parasitic adaptation.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Infestation

In Taenia (tape worm), the development of the zygote begins while it is still inside the uterus of
female. The last segments or proglottids and their uteri contain completely developed embryo. The
fully mature proglottids break off from the body and pass out of the body of man along with faeces
(undigested waste). The embryo inside the egg is round in shape and has six chitinous hooks.
It shows limited movement of contraction. In order to develop further it must reach a second
host which may be a cow. The parasite remains embedded in the voluntary muscles of cow. If
an improperly cooked beef is eaten by a person, the parasite which has not been killed begins to
develop further in the intestine of man.

Disinfestation

Once the parasite has entered the intestine of man it is difficult to remove it completely. In this
respect care should be taken to cook beef properly before eating it. So that there is no chance of
the parasite entering the digestive system but if it has entered then certain medicines are taken
to remove it. Its complete removal is necessary because if only head remains inside the intestine
it can grow into new tape-worm once again. Besides treatment with drugs, physicians also give
anema to the patient, to fully remove the parasite.

Triploblastic Animals - Pseudocoelomates
Aschelminthes (Phylum Nematoda) - The Round worms

General Characteristics

The name Nematoda means “pointed ends”. The animals included in this group nave elongated
worm like body with pointed ends. The nematodes are triploblastic and pseudocoelomates. One
end of the body is anterior, however the head is not clearly marked and there are no special sense
organs at this end. The nematodes exhibit bilateral symmetry and the body is unsegmented. The
body cavity is pseudocoelom. It is derived from the hollow space, the blastocoel, situated in the
blastula, an early stage in embryological development, and not from the mesoderm. It consists of a
number of vacuolated cells filled with a protein-rich fluid which develops high hydrostatic pressure.

The nematodes range from small microscopic forms, to some form reaching a length of upto one
metre. The digestive system is in the form of alimentary canal with two openings. The opening at
the anterior end is mouth and at the posterior end is the anus. In parasitic nematodes the digestive
system is simple. A fluid filled space is present between the body wall and alimentary canal. It
provides “tube within tube” type structure in nematodes. The excretory system consists of

@) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

two longitudinally running excretory canals which unite at the anterior end to form a single canal
that opens to the exterior through an excretory pore on the ventral surface. There is a nerve ring
around the pharynx, which give rise to dorsal, ventral and lateral nerve cords running throughout
the length of the worms. The sense organs are in the form of sensory papillae present on the lips
at the anterior end. The circulatory and respiratory systems are absent. The gaseous exchange
takes place through general body surface. Locomotion is by undulating waves of contraction and
relaxation of muscles. These muscles are arranged in four bands, two dorso-lateral and two ventro-
lateral. The circular muscles are absent, therefore the bending is dorso-ventral only.

The sexes are separate. The female gonads are ovaries and these produce eggs. These male gonads
are testes which produce sperms. A larval stage is present in the life cycle.

Importance - Parasitic Diseases
Aschelminthes is important from the point of view of its parasites of which it has a great variety
qausing some very serious diseases in man and plants.

Ascaris |lumbricoides is an intestinal parasite of man.

The genus Rhabditis contains numerous species normally found in soil, organic matter or water and
feces of manor animals. Enterobius vermicularis commonly known as pin worm is cosmopolitan but
more common in Europe and America. Pinworms are
parasites in the human caecum, colon and appendix.
Their movement causes intense itching of anus,
inflammation of mucous membrane of colon and
appendix resulting in insomnia and loss of appetite.

Ancylostoma duodenale is commonly known as hook worm. It is a parasite of human small intestine
in Asia, North Africa and Europe. It is very dangerous because it holds the villi of intestine and sucks
blood and body fluid. During feeding they produce an anticoagulant to prevent clotting of blood
and after feeding leave the wound bleeding. In children it can cause severe anemia and retard
physical and mental growth.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Triploblastic Animals - Coelomates
Phylum Annelida The Segmented Worms

General Characteristics
Most of the worms with which we are familiar are included in this phylum. They are segmented and
commonly called annelids, (from the Latin word for “ little ring”)

The body is metamerically segmented. The body becomes divided transversely into a number of
similar parts or segments. The subdivisions may be indicated externally by constrictions of the
body surface. Internally, the segments are separated from each other by septa extending across
the coelom. However, the various systems of body such as gut, blood vessels, and nerve cord are
continuous throughout the length of body penetrating each individual segment.

The animals are triploblastic and coelomate, showing bilateral symmetry. The annelids include
worms, which may be marine (Nereis), freshwater (sty/aria) or found in damp soil (earthworms).
Some are parasites, for example, Hirudo - (leech).

The annelids show specialization of body structures. The organ systems are well developed.

Digestive system is in the form of alimentary canal which is divided into distinct parts, each
performing a specific function. It has two openings, the mouth at the anterior end, and the anus
at the posterior end. The mouth is overhung by a lobed structure, the prostomium. In parasitic
species, the digestive system is poorly developed.

Annelids have true coelom i.e. the mesoderm splits into parietal layer which lines the body wall,
and the visceral layer which covers the alimentary canal, the space between the two layers of
mesoderm, is the coelom, and is filled in by coelomic fluid, which serves- as hydrostatic skeleton
also.

Excretion takes place by specialized structures called nephridia. These are ciliated organs present
in each segment in the body cavity.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Roundworm

A well developed central nervous system is present in annelids. It comprises of a simple brain and
a solid double, longitudinal, ventral nerve cord. Nerves arise in each segment from the nerve cord.

Annelids are the first group of invertebrates which have developed a closed circulatory system
- a system in which a circulatory fluid called blood flows in a network of vessels known as blood

vessels. It transports gases and nutrients.

The respiratory system is absent. The exchange of gases is by diffusion through the skin in to blood
capillaries. The skin is kept moist by , mucus, and coelomic fluid.

The body wall contains muscles which help in locomotion. The muscles are of two types:
a. Circular Muscles : These are arranged along the circumference of the body.

b. Longitudinal Muscles : These are arranged along the length of the body.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

The locomotion is brought about by the interaction of muscles and hydrostatic skeleton. Contraction
of circular muscle produces a pressure in the coelomic fluid that forces the body to elongate.
Similarly contraction of longitudinal muscles produce a pressure in the coelomic fluid that would
cause the body to widen. The organs of locomotion in annelids are chitinous chaetae or setae
embedded in sacs (earthworm) or on . parapodia present in the body wall (e.g., Nereis). Chaetae
are absent in leech.

The common mode of reproduction is sexual. Most annelids (Earthworm, leech) are hermaphrodite.
Insome annelids (e.g., Nereis) the sexes are separate, the fertilization is external and a free swimming
trochophore larva is produced

; . Earthworm
during the life cycle.
Burrowing activity of earthworms a ,
permits greater penetration of \
air into the soil, and improves el

drainage capacity of the soil.
It also enables roots to grow
downwards through the soil
more easily. Mixing and churning
of the soil is brought about when
earth which contains inorganic
particles is brought up to the
surface from lower regions.
Earthworm is perhaps most active
segmented worm in churning the

sol veers ‘ j commonly Fig. 10.7 Examples of animals belonging to

Phylum Annelida comprises :

1. Class Polychaeta
2. Class Oligochaeta 3. Class Hirudinea

Class Polychaeta

These have a distinct head region with eyes and structure known as palps and tentacles. Sexes are
usually separate. The organs of locomotion are parapodia. They are mostly aquatic (marine). During
development these give rise to a trochophore larva. Important examples are Nereis, Chaetopterus.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Class Oligochaeta
These animals have internal and external segmentation. Organs of locomotion are setae. Head
region not prominent or distinct. They are hermaphrodite (bisexual). No larva formed during
development e.g. Lumbricus terrestris, Pheretima posthuma and other earthworms. They may be
terrestrial or aquatic.

Class Hirudinea

They have body with fixed number of segments. Each segment has additional circular rings or
markings called annuli. They do not have organs of locomotion and move due to the contraction
of their body and with tne nelp of suckers. Mostly hermaphrodite and trochophore larva is formed
during development. They are aquatic. No distinct head is present but leeches have chitinous jaws
for making a puncture in the skin of the host. They also have an anticoagulant secretion which
is passed into the wound to allow smooth flow of blood into its digestive system where it can be
stored for a long time e.g. Hirudo medicinalis (medicinal leech).

Phylum : Arthropods - Animals with Jointed Legs

General Characteristics

The phylum contains more species than any other phylum. They are commonly called Arthropods
(arthron = joint + pods = feet). Insects (cockroaches, grasshoppers, butterflies, mosquitoes) are
most commoh arthropods on the earth.

The body is segmented. Each segment is attached to its neighbour by means of a modified portion
of cuticle which is thin and flexible. They possess jointed appendages. These appendages have

been modified for specialized functions.

These are believed to have common origin with annelids because both have some common
characteristics such as segmented body, appendages and cuticle.

Arthropods have exploited every type of habitat on land and in water. The aquatic species include
both freshwater and marine. Many of these can fly, therefore visit air periodically.

@) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Arthropods are variable structurally. Some are worm-like centipedes while the others are flying
insects with the body divided into distinct regions, the head, thorax and abdomen. The body is
covered with waterproof chitinous cuticle secreted by the epidermis.

The coelom is not present as the main body cavity. Instead a haemocoel has developed. It is reduced
coelom and communicates with blood vascular system.

The digestive system is in the form of alimentary canal with two openings, the mouth and anus. It is
divided into different parts each performing a specific function. The food comprises of small plants
and animals.

A well developed excretory system comprising of Malpighian tubules is present in arthropods. The
nitrogenous wastes are excreted in the form of solid uric acid.

A highly deyeloped nervous system is present. It consists of paired ganglia (simple brain) connected
to a ventral double nerve cord. A ganglion is present in each segment. Nerves arise from these
ganglia. The sensory organs are usually a pair of compound eyes and antennae etc.

Most arthropods possess an extensive tracheal system formed of air tubes called tracheae for
the exchange of gases. Main tubes open to the exterior through paired openings, called spiracles.
Aquatic art hropods respire through gills and book lungs.

The blood circulatory system in arthropods is unique. It is open circulatory system. The blood flows
in the body cavity bathing the tissues of the body. However, there is a primitive heart and a main
blood vessel situated dorsaliy. Blood is colourless as it is without haemoglobin.

The skeleton is external, i.e., exoskeleton. It is in the form of an outer covering, the cuticle which
is light in weight; and is formed chiefly of chitin. It provides surface for the attachment of muscles
which help in locomotion.

The arthropods exhibit active and swift movements. They swim, crawl or fly depending upon the

habitat they occupy. The organs of locomotion are paired appendages and in some cases paired
wings also.

3) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Reproduction and Life History
The sexes are separate. The testes and ovaries, produce sperms, and eggs respectively.

Metamorphosis

Life history of insects is characterized by metamorphosis (meta = change + morphe = form). This is
an abrupt change of form or structure during the life cycle. There are three morphologically distinct
Stages in the life cycle, the egg “finally develops into larva which is converted into motionless pupa
that finally develops into an adult. In some primitive insects the metamorphosis is incomplete. The
larva resembles adult and is called nymph or instar. It lives in the same habitat as adult.

Classification
Phylum Arthropoda is a large group consisting of great variety among them. Some of its important
classes are as follows.

1. Class Crustacea : These arthropods are aquatic and have gills for respiration. On the dorsal
side of the cephalothorax the exoskeleton is in the fofm of carapace. In the exoskeleton deposition
of salts in addition to chitin makes
it more firm. The appendages
are modified for capturing food,
walking, swimming, respiration
and reproduction. Coelom is
reduced and is in the form of
hemocoel. Head has two pairs of
antennal appendages, one pair
of mandibles (jaws) and two pairs
of maxillae. Sexes are mostly
Separate e.g. Daphnia, Cyclops,
Crabs, lobsters, prawn, wood louse
etc. (Fig. 10.8)

Fig. 10.8 Example of class crustacea

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

2. Class Insecta : This is the largest group
not only of Arthropoda but of all the animal
kingdom and has great variety. Insects are
found everywhere, many show social behaviour.
The body in, insects has three distinct regions
head, thorax and abdomen. There are a pair of
antennae and compound eyes on the head. The
head is usually vertical to the body and jaws are
ventrally placed. The thorax has three segments
in which are present three pairs of jointed legs
and in many one or two pairs of wings. Abdomen
has varying number of segments. Brain is formed
of fused ganglia and double nerve cord is ventral.
Sexes are separate and animals are oviparous.
Metamorphosis takes place during development
e.g. dragonfly mosquito, butterflies, moths,
wasps, and beetles etc. (Fig. 10.9). Fig. 10.9 Insects

3. Class Arachnida : Body has the anterior segments that are fused to form a combined
cephalothorax, with a pair of appendages called chelicerae with claws, two pairs as pedipalps
and four pairs of legs. There are no antennae and no true jaws. Abdomen may be segmented
or unsegmented with or without appendages. Respiration is by
gills or special structures called book lungs, excretion is by the
Malpighian tubules. Eyes simple, sexes are separate. They are
oviparous (lay eggs). No true metamorphosis e.g. scorpions,
Spiders, mites and ticks.

(25) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 10.10 Arachtiids

4. Class Myriapoda:
The body is divided into large number of segments each having a pair of legs. A pair of antennae
and a pair of eyes are present on head e.g. centipedes and millipedes.

General organization of Arthropods

Arthropods have characteristics of higher forms such as bilateral symmetry, triploblastic, coelomic
cavity and organ systems and have reached the peak of invertebrate evolution. Two of their main
achievements are the chitinous exoskeleton and locomotary mechanism. These animals can walk,
swim and fly. The jointed appendages (limbs) have been modified or diversified for various uses in
the different sub-groups of Arthropoda.

Chitin is non-living, non-cellular and is secreted by the under lying epidermis. It is made of
polysaccharide.On the outer side of chitin,there is a waxy layer. In some Arthropods and in certain
parts in other Arthropods chitin is soft and flexible, in others it is hard. In general, it is for protection
but it also serves as lever for the movement of muscles of jointed limbs. The chitin in the jaws is
used for biting and crushing food. It also forms lens of the compound eyes the copulatory organs
and organs of defence and offence.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

In the young Arthropods such as insect larvae, chitinous exoskeleton is shed from time to time to
allow the growth of the larva. This process of shedding of exoskeleton is called moulting or ecdysis.
In short the exoskeleton of chitin in the Arthropods is one of the primary factors in the success of
Arthropoda as it helps them to adapt to a wide variety of habitat.

Arthropods share with annelids the characteristic of having the body divided into similar segments.
In Arthropoda however segmentation is not metameric and organs are not repeated in the different
segments. Each somite typically is provided with a pair of jointed appendages. But this arrangement
is often modified with both segments and appendages specialized for different functions in different
habitats. However, in all kinds of habitat the jointed appendages provide an efficient means of
locomotion, offence and defence and also help in reproduction.

Economic Importance

Man and insects have been at war for the same food, same place to live in. Insects attack man,
his domestic animals and also his crops, causing a number of diseases. They are not only a health
hazard but also cause economic loss to man by destroying his property and crops. Some insects are
also useful to him such as the honey bee or the silk worm. Insects are therefore of great importance
to mankind.

1. Harmful Insects : Many types of mosquitoes, flies, fleas, lice and bugs transmit disease
causing organisms to man and domestic animals. We are familiar with mosquito of genus Anopheles,
the female of which transmits Plasmodium that causes malaria in man. The Tse-tse fly of African
countries transmits Trypanosoma, the cause of sleeping sickness and skin diseases. The common
house fly carries disease causing organisms to contaminate food and cause cholera, hepatitis etc.
Some species of Trypanosoma cause diseases in cattle, also.

A number of insects lay eggs on fruits and other commercial crops such as sugarcane, maize,
cotton and also on vegetables etc. The larvae of these insects damage fruits and the crops resulting
in economic loss to farmers. The locusts that move in large numbers from country to country cause
damage to standing crops and other plants.

2. Beneficial insects : The useful insects are the honey bee that provides man with honey and

also wax. Similarly the silk worm gives us silk. There are some insects that are predaceous on other
harmful insects. Some insects are scavengers and they eat up dead animal and vegetable matter.

Insect larvae are source of food for fish.
(27) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

PHYLUM MOLLUSCA (L. Molluscus - soft)

General Characters

The phylum Mollusca consists of diverse group of organisms which include slow-moving snails and
Slug, bivalved clams, and highly active cephalopods. The phylum includes over 50,000 living species
and is the second largest phylum of invertebrates. Giant squid is the largest invertebrate animal.

Molluscs also show a great diversity of form but all are built on the same basic plan.

Molluscs are triploblastic coelomates which exhibit bilateral symmetry. Most animals possess shell.
The body is covered by a glandular epithelial envelope called mantle which secretes calcareous
Shell. The shell is protective, however it is handicap to locomotion, therefore some of the more

active molluscs show a reduction or loss of shell.

Molluscs are widely distributed. Some groups are exclusively aquatic (e.g., cephalopoda), freshwater
or marine. The others include terrestrial animals (land snail) living mostly in moist places.

The body is unsegmented and soft. The body can be divided into head, a ventral muscular foot
and a dorsal visceral mass containing most of the internal organs. Over the visceral mass mantle
is present which secretes a shell. The space between the shell and mantle cavity contains gills in
some animals. In the mouth cavity of many molluscs there is a rasping tongue-like radula provided
with many horny teeth.

The body is highly organized with complex digestive, respiratory, circulatory, excretory, nervous
and reproductive systems.

Digestive system consists of gut with two openings, the mouth and the anus.
The excretory organs are paired nephridia.

Except for Cephalopoda, the circulatory system is open. The coelom is divided into sinuses or blood
spaces. Heart pumps the blood into the sinuses. A respiratory pigment of blue in color, called

haemocyanin is present.
V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

The gaseous exchange is by gills mostly. In some cases such as Snail, the mantle cavity is converted
into a lung.

The nervous system consists of three pairs of interconnected ganglia present in the head, foot and
body regions.

The organ of locomotion is a muscular foot, however in many species the movement is slow. The
others are sessile i.e. unable to move.

The sexes are separate. Trochophore larva develops during embryological development.

Classification
The molluscs are classified into six classes. The major classes are:

(1) Gastropoda

These are asymmetrical and their body is covered with usually coiled one piece shell. The animal
can withdraw itself into the shell. Both aquatic and terrestrial species are included in this class. The
aquatic species have gills while in land forms the mantle cavity is converted into lungs.

The common examples are:
|. Helix aspersa: |It is commonly termed garden snail.
li. Limax the slug

(ii) Bivalvia (Pelecypoda)
This class includes bilaterally symmetrical aquatic molluscs. The body is laterally compressed and
is enclosed by two pieces of shells hence the name bivalves. They respire by plate-like gills.

The common examples are:

(i) Mytilus: (marine mussel). (ii) Anodonta: (freshwater mussel),
(ili) Ostrea: (oyster).

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

(111) Cephalopoda

The members of this class are bilaterally Mussel
symmetrical with dorso-ventrally flattened
body. All species are aquatic. The shell is much :
reduced and internal. In most cases it is absent. Land snail
The animals are highly developed and active. Slug

The common examples are:
i. Loligo: (squid).

li. Sepia: (cuttlefish).

ili, Octopus

Octopus

Water snail

Fig. 10.17 Examples of molluscs

Economic Importance of Mollusca

Some molluscs are indirectly harmful to man but most of them are beneficial. The harmful molluscs
are slugs and shipworms. Slugs are injurious to gardens and cultivations. They not only eat leaves
but also destroy plants by cutting their roots and stems. Teredo, a shipworm damages wooden
parts of ships. But many molluscs are great source of food for man in many parts of world. Large
quantities of clams, oysters and mussels are eaten in Far-east, Europe and America. Oysters are
regarded as delicacy.

Shells of freshwater mussels are used in button
industry. Also shells of oysters are mixed with
tar for making roads in America. Shells in
certain parts of the world are also used for
making ornaments. Some oysters also make
valuable pearls e.g. the pearl oyster.


10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

PHYLUM ECHINODERMATA - The Spiny skinned animals

General Characteristics
There are over 5,000 known species of echinoderms. They are marine organisms living at the sea
bottom.

The body is covered by delicate epidermis. The mesodermal cells develop a firm calcareous
endoskeleton which may bear spines and because of its origin, from mesoderm it is called
endoskeleton.

Echinoderms are triploblastic coelomates and exhibit radial symmetry. The mouth is on lower
surface (oral) and anus is on upper surface (aboral).

The echinodermata are exclusively marine and mostofthem are found atthe bottom along shorelines
in shallow seas. Most species are free) moving however some are attached to the substratum.

All the larval forms of these animals exhibit bilateral symmetry but the adults show radial symmetry
which is an adaptation for their special mode of life.

The body may be flattened like biscuit (cake urchin), star-shaped with short arms (starfish) globular
(sea urchin), star-shaped with long arms (brittle star) or elongated (Ssea-cucumber). There is a central
disc from which arms radiate.

The most unique characteristics of echinoderms is that a water vascular system is present in their
coelom. It is a complex system of tubes and spaces surrounding the mouth and passing into the
arms and tube feet. The water circulates through these channels. Water enters these canals through
a sieve-like plate called madreporite present on the aboral body surface.

The motile species move with the help of tube feet. Each tube foot is a soft saclike structure present
along the edges of grooves present in the arms.

The echinoderms exhibit low degree of organization. There are specialized organs for digestion and
reproduction, but there are no specialized organs for respiration or excretion. The nervous system
is also poorly developed. There is no brain, however a nerve ring is present around the pharyngeal

@1) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

region. Similarly the circulatory system is poorly organized.

The sexes are separate and the fertilization is external. The larvae such as bipinnaria and
brachiolaria are complex, exhibit bilateral symmetry, and resemble those of chordates.

Regeneration, the ability to reform lost organs is common among echinoderms, starfish, sea
cucumber, sea lily, brittle star and sea-urchin exhibit this characteristics.

The echinoderms are comparatively simple in structure, organization and physiology, and deserve a
place slightly below the annelid worms. However, these are placed at the top of the list of invertebrate
phyla. This is because there are a number of striking resemblances, between the echinoderms and
chordates, such as:

a. There is radial cleavage during the development of embryos in both phyla.

b. The blastopore forms the anus in echinoderms
as well in chordates (Deuterostomes).

c. There are certain common _ biochemical
peculiarities among echinoderms and chordates

e.g. phosphocreatin is present in both.

The common examples are:

Brittlestar

Asterias (starfish):

Sea urchin Sea cucumber
Cake urchin Brittle star Sea Urchin

Fig. 10.12 Examples of Echinoderms.
Echinodermata / Affinities
Echinodermata do not show close relationship to most invertebrates, but they do show affinities
with hemichordata. Both these have a number of common features among which are the formation
of coelom and retention of blastopore as the site for future anus. In both mesoderm is derived from
the cells close to the blastopore. Both possess mesodermal endskeleton where as the exoskeleton
is ectodermal in orgin while in invertebtrates the blastopore develops into mouth.

(2) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

The above resemblances between two phyla are neither accidental nor due to convergent evolution
but are because the two are closely related and both emerged from the same (common) ancestor.
Echinoderms also show very close resemblance with chordates because both have mesodermal
skeleton, are deuterostomous, in both lower chordates and echinoderms the early development is
almost similar. That is why they have been placed closest to phylum chordata.

Phylum Hemichordata

Hemichordates are a group that has a combination of both invertebrate (Echinoderm) and chordate
characteristics.

The hemichordate along with Echinoderms and chordates belong to the group deuterostome
branch of animal kingdom.

Because of their close relationship to chordates these animals are called prechordates. The common
examples of this phylum are Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus.

General Characters

Soft bodied worm-like animali.

Body is divided into an anterior proboscis, collar and trunk.

Body wall is made of unicellular epidermis with mucus-secreting cells.
Digestive tract is straight and may show variations.

Coelomic cavities correspond to each of the three body regions i.e. that of proboscis, collar and
trunk coelomic pouches.

Circulatory system consists of a median dorsal and a median ventral vessel.
Respiratory system is composed of gill-slits forming a dorsal row behind collar.
Excretory system has single glomerulus connected to blood vessels.

Nervous system has a sub-epidermal plexus of cells and fibres.

WM RWN >

oO OND

(3) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

— a = ae
Apeetlonn ys ange et), 4 4
Wai eT iLL ie eh

Mouth

Fig. 10.13 Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus

Phylum Chordata

This great phylum derives its name from one of the few common characteristics of the group -
The notochord. This structure is possessed by all members of the phylum either in the larval or
embryonic stages or through out life. The notochord is a rod-like semi rigid body of vacuolated
cells which are filled with proteinaceous material which extends in most cases the length of the
body between enteric canal and the dorsal hollow central nervous system. Its primary purpose is
to support and to stiffen the body that is to act as skeletal axis.

It seems that the endoskeleton is the chief basic factor in the development and specialization of
higher animals.

The animals most familiar to us belong to the chordates including man himself.

The chordates show great variety and inhabit all kinds of habitat. All chordates possess three basic
characters which are as follows:

1. As already mentioned all possess the notochord.

2. All chordates have central nervous system that is dorsal in position and is hollow.

3. All chordates develop paired gill openings in embryonic stage. In some these are non-functional,
while in others they are functional for some period in their liie history e.g. frogs etc. in still other
these are functional throughout life e.g. amphioxus, and fishes etc.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Se
al

Sn lg

SS ek ke kk

Fig. 10.14 Amphioxus

Chordates have been divided into lower chordates, e.g. Amphioxus etc. and higher chordates which
are the vertebrates in which the notochord is replaced by the vertebral column and a bony brain
case cranium is also formed due to which they are also called craniates. Phylum Chordata has been
sub-divided as follows:

Protochordata (Acrania) (Lower Chordates)

Sub-phylum: Urochordata : Notochord and nerve cord only in the ffee-swimming larvae. Adults
are sessile and enclosed in a covering called tunic. Therefore, they are also called tunicates e.g.
Molgula.

Sub-phylum: Cephalochordata: Notochord and nerve cord extend along the entire length of the
body and persist throughout life e.g. Amphioxus.

(5) V: 1.1

Table 10.2 Classification of Phylum Chordates

Phylum Chordata

ee

Acrania Craniata
(No Cranium) (Cranium is present)
Urachordata Cephalochnordata Vertebrata
Leptocardii lcnay pie
Larvacea <Ascidiacea Thaliacea_ e.g.Branchiostoma Super class Ree

Pisces Tetrapoda

e.g.Oikopleura ¢.9.Ascidia &@.g. Salpa (Amphioxus)

Cyclostomata Chondrichthyes Osteichthyes

Amphibia Reptiia Aves Mammalia

Sub-Phylum Vertebrate (Craniate) (Higher chordates)

It includes animals which have cranium in which the brain is enclosed. It includes animals with
vertebral column that means that all chordates in this, group are under subphylum vertebrata and
are therefore vertebrates. Table 10.2 gives an outline of classification of sub-phylum vertebrata.

It is customary to place vertebrates into two super classes.
(1) Pisces (Fishes) which includes class cyclostomata, class chondrichthyes, class osteichthyes.
(2) Tetrapoda (Four footed) which includes the classes amphibia, reptilia, aves and mammaiia.

The former is made up of strictly aquatic forms and the latter of the land dwelling animals.
Vertebrates maybe divided into anamniotes or those without foetal membranes (cyclostomata,
chondrichthyes, osteichthyes and amphibia) and amniota or those with foetal membranes (reptilia,
aves and mammals)

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Superclass Pisces

This super class includes classes, cyclostomata, chondrichthyes and osteichthyes. The class
cyclostomata includes most primitive living vertebrates which are without jaws. This distinguishes
them from the rest of the vertebrates. They are represented by the lampreys and hagfish. Some of
their characteristics are as follows:

Body is long eel-like. 2. Scales absent.

No paired appendages. 4. Cartilaginous Skeleton.

Ventral Suctorial mouth. 6. Heart with one auricle.

Six to fourteen pairs of gills. Digestive system lacks stomach.
Sexes are separate in lampreys. Hag fishes are hermaphrodite.

0. Fertilization external and there is a long larval period in Lamprey.

oe NMS
Go §

Fig. 10.15 Lamprey

Class Chondrichthyes

This group includes the sharks and rays which have skeleton of cartilage but have many resemblances
to the bony fishes, the cartilaginous skeleton is considered a degeneratedjbharacter rather than

primitive character. Their main features are:
1. Body fusiform.
Mouth ventral olfactory sacs not connected to mouth cavity.

2
3. Placoid scales on the body.
4. Endoskeleton entirely cartilaginous.

@7) V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Digestive system with J-shaped stomach.

Circulatory system has many pairs of aortic arches.

Respiration by means of 5 - 7 pairs of gills without the covering i.e. operculum.
No swim bladder.

Sexes separate.

O. Oviparous or viviparous

aw ANnNan

With the exception of whale the sharks are the largest living vertebrates, some reaching 30 - 50 feet
in length.

The skates and rays are bottom dwelling fishes. In these the anterior pairs of fins (Pectoral fins) are
much enlarged and are used for swimming like wings. Two members of this group are of special
interest (1) the sting rays and (2) electric rays.

In the sting ray the tail is long & whip-like and has sharp spines which can inflict very dangerous
wounds. The electric ray on the other hand has certain dorsal muscles modified into powerful
electric organ which can give severe shocks & stun their prey.

Sharks are of economic importance; most are highly destructive to fish, lobsters & crabs. In some
parts of the world sharks are used as food by man. Commercially shark liver oil is extracted and
used in medicine as a source of vitamin A and D and shark skin leather is used for making articles.

Fig. 10.16 Shark

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Following are the characteristics of bony fishes :

1.
2.
3.

NOW Ss

co ©

They have more or less bony skeleton which has replaced the cartilaginous skeleton.
Notochord may persist in parts.

The skin has embedded dermal scales which may be ganoid, cycloid or ctenoid scales. No
placoid scales.

Fins both, median (single) or paired and have fin rays of cartilage or bone.

Mouth is terminal. Jaws either with or without teeth.

Respiration by gills supported by bony gill arches and covered by operculum.

A swim bladder is usually present with or without connection with the pharynx. This helps in
bouyancy.

Two chambered heart with one atrium and one ventricle. Blood has nucleated red cells.
Brain with 10 pairs of cranial nerves.

Sexes are Separate, gonads paired. Fertilization is usually external.

Adaptations to Aquatic Life:
The major adaptations in fishes for the aquatic mode of life are as follows:

1.

Stream - lined body (boat shaped) The body of fish is such that it offers little resistance to water
while swimming.
Swim bladder: This is found in most bony fish except a few; it may or may not be connected to
pharynx. It is mainly a hydrostatic organ & can change the gravity of fish by filling itself with gas.
The fish qan thus float high or sink lower in water. The gases that fill the swim bladder are either
oxygen, carbon dioxide and nitrogen and may be secreted by the gland in the swim bladder
itself. In those fishes in which the swim bladder is connected to pharynx the bladder may be
filled by gulping of air.

Fins: Fins are another important adaptation to aquatic life and are of two types

(1) paired fins (Pectoral and Pelvic) and (2) unpaired fins which are dorsal, caudal (tail) and anal
fins. Fins help in swimming as they keep balance of fish in water.

Circulatory System : Heart with two chambers, with afferent & efferent branchial system.
Respiratory system: In most fishes respiratory organs are the gills, adapted to receive oxygen
dissolved in water and remove carbon dioxide in water as the gills have network of blood
capillaries

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Excretory Organs: Kidneys of fish are also modified for excretion in the aquatic environment.

The vertebrates already considered are adapted to strict aquatic life. The group of ancient fish
known as dipnoi showed modification of aquatic breathing system to meet the conditions of
terrestrial life by developing lungs. But this case is only an incident in the transition to land. There
are anumber of differences between water and land habitats.

Au RWN D>

Oxygen is more in the air than in water.

Dissolved substances are present in water for example different kinds of salts.
Temperature changes are more drastic in the terrestrial environment.

Land habitat provides a great variety of cover and shelter than aquatic habitat.
As a medium water provides greater support to the body than air.

Land affords a greater variety of breeding places than does water.

In their transition from aquatic to land environment animals had to undergo modifications or
adaptations to cope with the above conditions on land. This included:

Development of skin for protection against dry conditions of land.

The eggs of land animals are protected by shells from drying and mechanical injury. Also the
size of the egg is large to provide space for storage of food.

The terrestrial animals developed lungs in place of gills which could take oxygen from air.

In connection with the development of lungs there are corresponding changes in the circulatory
system to take oxygen from air.

For locomotion the paddle-like fins are replaced by jointed appendages modified for walking,
running, climbing and flying.

Sensory organs have become more advanced and specialized.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Plaice

Fig. 10.17 Bony fishes

Super class Tetrapoda: These have 2 pairs of jointed limbs (tetrapods)
Class Amphibia

Amphibians are on the border line between aquatic and true terrestrial animals. Fossil evidence
from the Devonian period of earths history suggests that a large population of fish belonging
to the group lobe-fins (dipnoi) came to live in shallow fresh water. Some of these crawled from
one pool to another and therefore spent some time on land. This gave rise to the group that we
recognize as amphibians which are the first vertebrates to come on land. Although amphibians have
acquired certain characters enabling them to live on land but at the same time they have retained
some aquatic characters as the result of their dependence on aquatic habitat. This double life is
expressed in their name. Structurally they are between the fish on one hand and the reptiles on the
other. In the transitions from water to land amphibians have developed limbs in place of fins, lungs
in place of gills and some changes in skin. Their circulatory system’ provides for lung circulation
but all of them in larval form retain their link with aquatic life by having gills, circulation of blood,
digestive system which are representative of aquatic mode of life. Because of their dependence on
water for their life history they are not a very successful group of vertebrates and are confined to
areas only where they can find water or moist conditions.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

The characteristic features of amphibians therefore are:

1. Skeleton is mostly bony. Body form varies greatly in the different amphibians, tailed or without
tail.

2. Limbs usually four (tetrapod condition) but some are legless (e.g. caecilians). Webbed feet often
present.

3. Skin smooth and moist with many glands. In some glands are poisonous, pigment cells
(chromatophores) present in the skin. Scales absent.

4. Respiration takes place by gills in the larval stage and by lungs and skin in the adult.

5. Heart is 3-chambered with respect to atria and ventricle sinus venosus, truncus arteriosus are
present, double circulation takes place through the heart.

6. Sexes separate, fertilization external, larval stage present.

Changes into adult by metamorphosis. Amphibians are anamniotes.

8. Amphibians are cold blooded (poikilothermic) animals and hibernate in winter.
Examples frogs, toads, and salamander.

™

Class Reptilia:
Reptiles are adapted for existence solely on land in contrast to amphibians that are still tied more
or less to water or moist habitat. This indicates that reptiles have certain adaptations not found in
amphibians. Some of these advancements shown by reptiles are their characteristic features which
are as follows:
1. Reptiles have developed some sort of copulatory organ necessary for internal fertilization.
2. In amniotic eggs of reptiles the shell is leathery which can resist dryness and injury. They have
large yolky eggs.
Reptiles have dry scaly skin which is adapted to land life.
4, Reptiles have protective embryonic membranes amnion, allantois, and chorion.
5. In reptiles the ventricle of heart is incompletely partitioned ensuring more oxygen

supply through blood circulation to all parts of the body. In crocodiles ventricle is

completely partitioned into two.
6. Most reptiles have better developed limbs well adapted for efficient locomotion.
7. Reptiles like amphibians are cold blooded (poikilothermic) and hibernate in winter.

Ww

The above characteristics are for terrestrial habitat in which the reptiles mostly live. However, it is
an established fact that reptiles have evolved from amphibians by undergoing the above changes
and have become fully terrestrial.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Reptiles flourished throughout Mesozoic era (225-65 million years). The climate which had been
Suitable for reptiles in that period, became less favourable to them in tertiary period. So most of
them became extinct. The existing reptiles belong to four, out of a dozen or more main lines that
existed in the past.

The present day reptiles are, firstly, the lizards and snakes. Secondly the tuatra (spohenodon) of
New Zealand, which have survived upto today with little change. Thirdly the crocodiles, which are
an offshoot from the stock from which modem birds were derived. The reptiles of today have been
derived from dinosaurs of Jurassic (195-136 million years), and cretaceous period (136-65 million

years).

The modem reptiles for the most part live in the temperate and tropical zones indeed they flourish
only in the latter.

Slow-worm

Tadpoles

Snake

Fig. 10.18 Amphibians and Reptiles

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Class Aves - Birds
Birds are one of the most interesting and most widely known group of animals. Birds share with
mammals the highest development in the animal kingdom. It is believed that both birds and
mammals have evolved from reptiles along different lines. The earliest known bird fossil is that
of archaeopteryx, two species of which have been found from rocks of Jurassic period of earth’s
history. The fossil shows that archaeopteryx, was about the size of a crow with skull similar to
that of present day birds. It had bony teeth in the jaw socket unlike modem birds which do not
have teeth. Jaws extended into a beak and there was a long tail. Each wing had three claws. With
the exception of feathers these birds showed resemblance to the dinosaurs (giant reptiles of the
past). Many fossils of birds from later eras of earth history have also been found that had teeth.
The above evidence suggests that birds evolved from reptilian ancestors. The archaeopteryx and
others had characteristic of both reptiles and birds and therefore form a connecting link between
the two distinct groups.

In eagle both
ovaries and
oviducts are
functional.

Archaeopteryx

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Characters of Birds

1.

anu RW

oo N

11.

12.

Body is stream-lined and spindle shaped with four divisions, viz; head, neck, trunk and tail.
These are warm-blooded (homeothermic).

Limbs are adapted for flying. The fore-limbs are modified into wings and hind limbs for perching
and in some birds for running as in ostrich.

There is the epidermal exoskeleton of feathers, legs bear scales.

The skeleton is light due to air spaces which is an adaptation for flying.

The skull has large sockets, jaws extend into homy beak, teeth are absent.

The circulatory system has 4-chambered heart and there is only right aorta which curves to the
right side and then bends backwards.

The lungs have extensions known as air-sacs which extend into the bones also.

The organ of voice is called syrinx, it is situated at the lower end of trachea near the origin of
the two bronchi.

Excretory system does not have a bladder, urine is semi solid.

. Sexes are separate. Fertilization is internal and eggs are of large size with much yolk. Only one

ovary and oviduct is functional.
Since birds do not have teeth they have developed a thick muscular structure (Gizzard) which
is used for crushing food.

Some birds have secondarily lost the power of flight and are called running birds e.g. Ostrich,
Kiwi, etc.

Fig. 10.19 Birds

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

The term mammal was given by Linnaeus to the group of animals which are nourished by milk
from the breast of the mother. The group is considered to be the highest in the animal kingdom.
Their advancement over other groups is quite pronounced. The most important advancement
is the evolution and development of their brain (nervous system) over the other vertebrates. It
is universally accepted by biologists that mammals have evolved from reptilian ancestors, the
cotylosaurs. This has been determined on the basis of the fossil record which is easily available
because of the hard bones that were preserved as fossils, unlike the birds which have soft bones
and mostly have not been preserved. The ancestors of mammals lived simultaneously along with
reptiles during the Jurassic times and have been called mammal-like reptiles. Some were only of
the size of mice and lived on trees. One of these early reptile was varanope that was found as
fossil in Texas. Probably at least five groups of such mammal-like reptiles developed mammalian
characters and were 50% mammals. Mammals became dominant in the Cenozoic period.

Seal

mi

Deer

Mouse
Dog \

Fig. 10.20 Mammals

V: 1.1

aa
eae

Squrriel


10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

General Characters of Mammals
Although mammals have evolved from reptiles they show many important structural differences.
These differences are in fact the general characters of mammals which are as follows:-

1. Most mammals have a body covering of hair instead of scales.
2. There isa muscular diaphragm in mammals that separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities.
This structure is not found in any previous group.
3. The lower jaw in mammals is composed of only one large bone and articulates directly with
skull.
4. External ear or pinna in present. There is a chain of three bones in the ear Malleus, Incus &
Stapes.
5. Mammals have deciduous and permanent teeth in some mammals e.g. man the teeth are in
two sets, one in early life the milk teeth and later the permanent teeth.
Mammals have 4-chambered heart and only left aortic arch (in birds it is right).
Mammals are warm blooded (Homeothermic) animals.
The red blood cells are non-nucleated.
Mammals have well developed voice apparatus, the larynx and epiglottis.
. Most mammals give birth to young (viviparous).
. Mammals feed their young on milk produced by mammary glands of mother. Mammals are

Rae ON

—- oO

classified into three sub-classes.

1. Prototheria - egg-laying mammals
2. Metatheria - pouched mammals
3. Eutheria - Placental mammals including man

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

1. Sub-Class Prototheria The Prototheria is that group which has characteristics of both reptiles
and mammals and therefore form a connecting link between the two. They also provide evidence
of the evolution/origin of mammals from reptilian stock. Certain members of this sub-class are
adapted for aquatic life as the duck bill which has a bill similar to that of a duck and has webbed
toes. It has thick fur on its body. The female has mammary glands to feed the young. Both these are
mammalian characters. At the same time these animals have cloaca and cloacal opening instead of
Separate openings for digestive system and urinogenital system. Both these characters are reptilian
characters. These animals are found in Australia, e.g. Duck bill Platyous & Echidna (Spiny anteater).

2. Sub-Class Metatheria Next to Prototheria, the Metatheria are the most primitive mammals They
are characterized by an abdominal pouch the marsupium where they rear their young. The young
when born are immature and are carried by the mother in the marsupium till they develop to their
maximum. During this period they are fed on the milk produced by the milk glands of mother, the
nipples of which are in the marsupium. For this reason these animals are also called marsupials or
pouched mammals, e.g. Opossum, Kangaroo and Tasmanian wolf found in Australia and America.

3. Sub-Class Eutheria This sub-class includes placental mammals. In the body of mother
development of young is maximum and the young when bom are fully developed. In these mammals
during development a structure known as placenta is formed through which the fetus is nourished.
Also the placenta has endocrine function i.e. it produces certain hormones, for this reason these
mammals are also called placental mammals. Placental mammals have maximum mammalian
characters but in some the hair have become modified into scales (pangolin) and spines (porcupine).
Examples are man, whale, elephant, horse, rat, mice, bat, dolphin, etc.

Mammals being a very successful group live in all kinds of habitat i.e. land, fresh water and sea for
which their bodies are modified.

V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

EXERCISE

Q1. Fill in the blanks.
(i) | Frotozons have been placed in a separate kingdom known as
(ii) The sponges do not have any symmetry and are therefore called__
(iii) Between ectoderm and endoderm the coelenterate have a non cellular
(iv) Taenia soliumhas_____— and____ for attachment to the intestine of host.
(v) In annelids the body segmentation of the type known as

(vi) In insects there are pairs of legs present in the region of the
body.

(vii) The organ of locomotion in molluscs is the
(viii) In animals where there are definite left & right sides the symmetry is

(ix) The system in which water move inside the body of an echinoderm is called

(x) Coelom is the body cavity formed from the layer.

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

Q.2.

Each question has few options. Encircle the correct answer.

Vertebrates that develop embryonic membranes around their embryo are called (Amniotes,
Anamniotes)

(i) In animals the bodies of which can be divided in two equal halves only in one

plane are (asymmetrical, bilaterally symmetrical, radially symmetrical)

(ii) Animals that have their body cavity filled with parenchyma are (Acoelomates,
Coelomate, Pseudocoelomates)

(iii) | The vertebrates in which placenta is formed during the development of faetus are
(Pisces,Aves, Mammalia)

(iv) | In amphibians the necessary requirements to spend their life history are (land,
water, or both)

(v) Trypanosoma causes the diseases (Malaria, Sleeping sickness)

(vi) In annelids the organs or excretion are (flame-fcells, nephridia, kidneys) In
arthropoda the body cavity is (pseudocoeloms, enterocoel, haemocoel)

(vii) In mollusca the foot is used for (capturing prey, locomotion, or both)
Extensive questions.

(i) What are Cnidaria? Explain the diploblastic origin, alternation of generations in
cranidaria.

(ii) Describe the parasitic adaptations in phylum platyhelminthes - How does
tape worms affect a person.

(iii) | Give the symptoms of the disease caused by certain nematodes.

(iv) | Give an account of the major groups of Arthropods. What is the economic

importance of insects.
V: 1.1

10. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab

(v) Give the two major classes of the pisces and explain the adaptations of aquatic mode
of life in fishes.

(vi) Give the adaptations for aerial mode of life in birds. What is their origin.

(vii) What are the general characteristics of mammals? How do the three subclasses
protheria, metatheria and eutheria differ from one another.

(viii) Distingnish between the following by giving examples
(a) Radial and Bilateral Symmetry.
(b) Diploblastic and triploblastic animals.
(c) Anamniotes and amniotes.

CHAPTER

BIOENERGETICS

Animation 11: Bioenergetics

ource & Credit: Wikispaces


11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Bioenergetics is the quantitative study of energy relationships and energy conversions in biological
systems. Biological energy transformations obey the laws of thermodynamics.

All organisms need free energy for keeping themselves alive and functioning. All life on this planet
Earth is powered, directly or indirectly, by solar energy. But no organism can make direct use of
sunlight as source of energy for metabolism; all can use chemical energy in the food such as sugars
etc. The chloroplasts of the plants capture light energy coming from the sun and convert it into
chemical energy that gets stored in sugar and then in other organic molecules.

With the emergence of photosynthesis on earth, molecular oxygen began to accumulate slowly inthe
atmosphere. The presence of free oxygen made possible the evolution of respiration. Respiration
releases great deal of energy, and couples some of this energy to the formation of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) molecules. ATP is a kind of chemical link between catabolism and anabolism.

The process of photosynthesis helps understand some of the principles of energy transformation
(Bioenergetics) in living systems. Photosynthetic organisms (higher land plants for instance) use
solar energy to synthesize organic compounds (such as carbohydrates) that can not be formed
without the input of energy. Energy stored in these molecules can be used later to power cellular
processes and can serve as the energy source for all forms of life. Whereas photosynthesis provides
the carbohydrate substrate, glycolysis and respiration are the processes whereby the energy
stored in carbohydrate is released in a controlled manner. So the photosynthesis acts as an energy-
capturing while respiration as an energy releasing process.

PHOTOSYNTHESIS
(CONVERSION OF SOLAR ENERGY INTO CHEMICAL ENERGY)

Photosynthesis can be defined as the process in which energy-poor inorganic oxidised compounds
of carbon (i.e. CO,) and hydrogen (i.e. mainly water) are reduced to energy-rich carbohydrate
(i.e. Sugar-glucose) using the light energy that is absorbed and converted into chemical energy
by chlorophyll and some other photosynthetic pigments. The process of photosynthesis in green
plants can be summarised as:

@) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

chlorophyll

6CO, + 12H,O + light +> C,H,,0, + 60, + 6H,O

(carbon dioxide) (water) (glucose) (oxygen) (water)

Photosynthetic Reactants and Products

From above overall reaction of photosynthesis it becomes evident that carbon dioxide, water and
light are the reactants while glucose and oxygen are the products. Water appears on both sides
of the equation because water is used as reactant in some reactions and released as product in
other. However, because there is no net yield of H,0, we can simplify the summary equation of
photosynthesis for purpose of discussion:

6CO,, + 6H,O + light energy —— CoH ,06+ 60,

This is almost exactly opposite to the overall equation of aerobic respiration
(C,H),0,+ 600, > 6CO,* 6H,0 * energy) photosynthesis uses the products of respiration and
respiration uses the products of photosynthesis. There is another important difference between the
two processes : Photosynthesis occurs only during day time, whereas respiration goes on day and
night. During darkness leaves (and other actively metabolizing cells) respire and utilize oxygen and
release carbon dioxide. At dawn and dusk, when light intensity is low, the rate of photosynthesis and
respiration may, for a short time, equal one another. Thus the oxygen released from photosynthesis is
just the amount required for cellular respiration. Also, the carbon dioxide released by respiration just
equals the quantity required by photosynthesizing cells. At this moment there is no net gas exchange
between the leaves and the atmosphere. This is termed as compensation point. As the light intensity
increases, SO does the rate of photosynthesis and hence the requirement for more carbon dioxide
increases which respiration alone cannot supply. Similarly, the oxygen produced during photosynthesis
is more than the need of the respiring cells, so the result is the net release of oxygen coupled with the
uptake of carbon dioxide.

Water and Photosynthesis

Oxygen released during photosynthesis comes from water, and is an important source of atmospheric
oxygen which most organisms need for aerobic respiration and thus for obtaining energy to live. In
1930s, Van Niel hypothesized that plants split water as a source of hydrogen, releasing oxygen as a
by-product. Niel’s hypothesis was based on his investigations on photosynthesis in bacteria that make
carbohydrate from carbon dioxide, but do not release oxygen.

G) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Niel’s hypothesis that source of oxygen released during photosynthesis is water and not carbon dioxide,
was later confirmed by scientists during 1940s when first use of an isotopic tracer (O18) in biological
research was made. Water and carbon dioxide containing heavy-oxygen isotope O'® were prepared in
the laboratory. Experimental green plants in one group were supplied with H,0 containing O'* and with
CO, containing only common oxygen O"°. Plants in the second group were supplied with H,0
containing common oxygen O'® but with CO, containing O°.

It was found that plants of first group produced O'® but the plants of second group did not.

18 18
) + 2H 0 —~> CH,0 + H,0 +O2

Group-2 Plants: CO 2!8 + 2H,0 —> CHO! 8+ H,0'* +0,

Group-1 Plants: CO

Water is thus one of the raw materials of photosynthesis, other being carbon dioxide. Hydrogen
produced by splitting of water reduces NADP to NADPH, (NADPH + H’).

NADPH is the “reducing power” which, along with ATP also formed during ‘light reactions’, is used to
reduce CO, to form sugar during ‘dark reactions’.

CHLOROPLASTS - THE SITES OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN PLANTS

All green parts of a plant have chloroplasts, but the leaves are the major sites of

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

c :

Cuticle
-Epidermis

Mesophyll

Vascular bundle

Bundle
Sheath

= Outer
Chloroplasts wg Hig ecetrahns
hd Inner
Vacuole : = = Se
Sent | Granum
Nucleus Shenns
Cell wall: wy NS Z| Thylakoid

Fig. 11.1 A plant possesses thick layer of mesophyll cells rich in chloroplasts. Thylakoids in chloroplasts are stacked into grana. Light
reactions take place on the grana, and dark reactions in the stroma.

photosynthesis in most plants. Chloroplasts are present in very large number, about half a million
per square millimeter of leaf surface. Chloroplasts are present mainly in the cells of mesophyll
tissue inside the leaf (Fig. 11.1). Each mesophyll cell has about 20-100 chloroplasts. Chloroplast has
a double membrane envelope that encloses dense fluid-filled region, the stroma which contains
most of the enzymes required to produce carbohydrate molecules. Another system of membranes
is Suspended in the stroma. These membranes form an elaborate interconnected set of flat, disc like
sacs Called thylakoids. The thylakoid membrane encloses a fluid-filled ‘thylakoid interior space’
or lumen, which is separated from the stroma by thylakoid membrane. In some places, thylakoid
sacs are stacked in columns called grana (sing granum). Chlorophyll (and other photosynthetic

G) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

pigments) are found embedded in the thylakoid membranes and impart green colour to the plant.
Electron acceptors of photosynthetic ‘Electron Transport Chain’ are also parts of these membranes.
Thylakoid membranes are thus involved in ATP synthesis by chemiosmosis.

Chlorophyll (and other pigments) absorb light
Photosynthetic prokaryotes lack chloroplasts but they do

energy, which is converted into chemical energy have unstacked photosynthetic membranes which work like
of ATP and NADPH, the products which are used _ thylakoids.

to synthesize sugar in the stroma of chloroplast.

PHOTOSYNTHETIC PIGMENTS

Light can work in chloroplasts only if it is absorbed. Pigments are the substances that absorb visible
light(380-750 nm in wave length). Different pigments absorb light of different wave lengths (colours),
and the wave lengths that are absorbed disappear. An instrument called Spectrophotometer is
used to measure relative abilities of different pigments to absorb different wavelengths of light.
A graph plotting absorption of light of different wave lengths by a pigment is called absorption
spectrum of the pigment.

Thylakoid membranes contain several kinds of pigments, but chlorophylls are the main
photosynthetic pigments. Other, accessory photosynthetic pigments present in the chloroplasts
include yellow and red to orange carotenoids; carotenes are mostly red to orange and xanthophylls
are yellow to orange. These broaden the absorption and utilization of light energy.

Chlorophylls

There are known many different kinds of chlorophylls. Chlorophyll a, b, c and d are found in
eukaryotic photosynthetic plants and algae, while the other are found in photosynthetic bacteria
and are known as bacteriochlorophylls.

Chlorophylls absorb mainly violet-blue and orange-red wave lengths. Green, yellow and indigo
wave lengths are least absorbed by chlorophylls and are transmitted or reflected, although the
yellows are often masked by darker green colour. Hence plants appear green, unless masked by
other pigments (Fig. 11.4).

(6) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics

A chlorophyll molecule has two
main parts : One flat, square,
light absorbing hydrophilic head
and the other long, anchoring,
hydrophobic hydrocarbon _ tail.
The head is complex porphyrin
ring which is made up of 4 joined
smaller pyrrole rings composed
of carbon and nitrogen atoms. An
atom of magnesium is present in
the centre of porphyrin ring and is
coordinated with the nitrogen of
each pyrrole ring (Fig. 11.2) That is
why magnesium deficiency causes
yellowing in plants.

Haem portion of haemoglobin
is also a porphyrin ring but
containing an ironatom instead of
magnesium atom in the centre.

Long hydrocarbon tail which is
attached to one ofthe pyrrole rings
is phytol (C,,. H,,). The chlorophyll
molecule is embedded in the
hydrophobic core of thylakoid
membrane by this tail.

Chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b
differ from each other in only one
of the functional groups bonded
to the porphyrin; the methyl group
(-CH, ) in chlorophyll a is replaced
by a terminal carbonyl group
(-CHO) in chlorophyll b.

eLearn.Punjab

CHO in chlorophyll! b

CH, in chlorophy II a

Porghyrin ring
(absorbs light )
Phytol
(hydrocarbon )
tail

Fig. 11.2 A molecule of chlorophyll

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
The molecular formulae for chlorophyll a and b are:
Chlorophyll a: C., H,, 0, N, Mg Chlorophyll b : C,, H_, 0, N, Mg

Due to this slight difference in their structure, the two chlorophylls show slightly different absorption
spectra and hence different colours. Some wave lengths not absorbed by chlorophyll a are very
effectively absorbed by chlorophyll b and vice-versa. Such differences in structure of different
pigments increase the range of wave lengths of the light absorbed. Chlorophyll a is blue-green
while chlorophyll b is yellow-green.

Of all the chlorophylls, chlorophyll a is the-most abundant and the most important photosynthetic
pigment as it takes part directly in the light-dependent reactions which convert solar energy
into chemical energy. It is found in all photosynthetic organisms except photosynthetic bacteria.
Chlorophyll a itself exists in several forms differing slightly in their red absorbing peaks e.g. at 670,
680, 690, 700 nm.

Chlorophyll b is found alongwith chlorophyll ain all green plants (embryophytes) and green algae.

Chlorophylls areinsolubein water butsoublein organicsolvents, suchas carbontetrachloride,alcohol
etc.

Carotenoids-accessory pigments

Carotenoids are yellow and red to orange pigments that absorb strongly the blueviolet range,
different wave lengths than the chlorophyll absorbs. So they broaden the spectrum of light that
provides energy for photosynthesis.

These and chlorophyll b are called accessory pigments because they absorb light and transfer
the energy to chlorophyll a, which then initiates the light reactions. It is generally believed that the
order of transfer of energy is:

carotenoids t—~+ chlorophyll b —~> chlorophyll a
Some carotenoids protect chlorophyll from intense light by absorbing and dissipating excessive

light energy, rather than transferring energy to chlorophyll. (Similar carotenoids may be protecting
human eye).

V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

LIGHT-THE DRIVING ENERGY

Light is a form of energy called electromagnetic energy or radiations. Light behaves as waves as
well as sort of particles called photons. The radiations most important to life are the visible light
that ranges from about 380 to 750 nm in wave length.

It is the sunlight energy that is absorbed by chlorophyll, converted into chemical energy, and drives
the photosynthetic process. Not all the. light falling on the leaves is absorbed. Only about one
percent of the light falling on the leaf surface is absorbed, the rest is reflected or transmitted.

Absorption spectrum for chlorophylls (Fig. 11.4) indicates that absorption is maximum in blue and
red parts of the spectrum, two absorption peaks being at around 430 nm and 670 nm respectively.
Absorption peaks of carotenoids are different from those of chlorophylls.

Different wavelengths are not only differently absorbed by photosynthetic pigments but are also
differently effective in photosynthesis. Graph showing relative effectiveness of different wavelengths
(colours) of light in driving photosynthesis is called
action spectrum of photosynthesis (Fig. 11.4)

Absorbance
Filament
of green alga

Fi.g 11.3 Engel man illuminated a filament of Spirogyra with light that had been passed through a prism. Aerobic bacteria moved
toward the portions of the algal filament emitting the most oxygen, along the cells in blue and red portion of the spectrum.

(@) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Action spectrum can be obtained by illuminating plant with light of different wavelengths (or
colours) and then estimating relative CO, consumption or oxygen release during photosynthesis.

Fs

Relative rates of photosynthesis

0
400 450 500 550 600 650 700 75C
Wave length in nm
(a) (b) g

Fig.11.4 (a) Absorption spectrum of chlorophyll and carotenoids.
(b) Action spectrum for photosynthesis.

As is evident from above figure 11.4, action spectrum of photosynthesis corresponds to absorption
spectrum of chlorophyll. The same two peaks and the valley are obtained for absorption of light as
well as for CO, consumption. This also shows that chlorophyll is the photosynthetic pigment.

However, the action spectrum of photosynthesis does not parallel the absorption specturm of
chlorophyll exactly. Compared to the peaks in absorption spectrum, the peaks in action spectrum
are broader, and the valley is narrower and not as deep.

(Photosynthesis in the most absorbed range is more than the absorption itself. Likewise,
photosynthesis in 500-600 nm (including green light) is more than the absorption of green light by
the chlorophyll). This difference occurs because the accessory pigments, the carotenoids, absorb
light in this zone and pass on some of the absorbed light to chlorophylls which then convert light
energy to chemical energy. When equal intensities of light are given, there is more photosynthesis
in red than in blue part of spectrum.

V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

ROLE OF CARBON DIOXIDE :
A PHOTOSYNTHETIC REACTANT

Sugar is formed during light - independent reactions of photosynthesis by the reduction of CO,,
using ATP and NADH, the products of light - dependent reactions. Obviously photosynthesis does
not occur in the absence of CO...

About 10 percent of total photosynthesis is carried out by terrestrial plants, the rest occurs in oceans,
lakes and ponds. Aquatic photosynthetic organisms use dissolved CO,, bicarbonates and soluble
carbonates that are present in water as carbon source. Air contains about 0.03 - 0.04 percent CO.,.
Photosynthesis occurring on land utilizes this atmospheric CO..

Carbondioxide enters the leaves through stomata and gets dissolved in the water absorbed by
the cell walls of mesophyll cells. Stomata are found in a large number in a leaf; their number being
proportional to the amount of gas diffusing into the leaf. Stomata cover only 1 - 2 percent of the
leaf surface but they allow proportionalety much more gas to diffuse.

The entry of CO, into the leaves depends upon the opening of stomata. The guard cells guarding
the stoma, because of their peculiar structure and changes in their shape, regulate the opening
and closing of stomata.

Stomata are adjustable pores that are
usually open during the day when CO, is
required for photosynthesis and partially
closed at night when photosynthesis
stops.

REACTIONS OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS

Photosynthesis is a ‘redox process’ that can be represented by the following simplified summary

equation:
(11) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

[C8 CHION — a

Chlorophyll
6COz, + 12 H,0 + light energy ————> GH:0O¢ + 602 + 6H;0

Carbon water glucose oxygen

diocide L —“‘OXiation

However, it is not a simple, single step process, but is a complex one that is completed by a series
of simple steps or reactions. These reactions of photosynthesis consist of two parts:

The light-dependent reactions (light reactions) which use light directly and
The light-independent reactions (dark reactions) which do not use light directly.

Light dependent reactions constitute that phase of photosynthesis during which light energy is
absorbed by chlorophyll and other photosynthetic pigment molecules and converted into chemical
energy. As a result of this energy conversion, reducing and assimilating power in the form of
NADPH (NADPH + H*) and ATP, are formed, both temporarily storing energy to be carried alongwith
H to the light independent reactions.

NADPH provides energized electron (and H*), while ATP provides chemical energy for the synthesis
of sugar by reducing CO,, using reducing power and chemical energy of NADPH and ATP respectively,
produced by light reactions. The energy is thus stored in the molecules of sugar. This phase of
photosynthesis is also called dark reactions because these reactions do not use light directly and
can take place equally well both in light and dark provided NADPH, and ATP of light reactions are
available.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Light Reactions
Calvin Cycle

4 - S06 chain “ He

ght React

: Amino acids

fatty acids
©)

Fig. 11.5 An overview of photosynthesis : Light - Dependent Reactions (Energy - conversion) and Light - Independent Reactions (Energy
- conservation)

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Light dependent Reactions
(Energy-conversion phase; formation of ATP and NADPH)

As has been described previously, sunlight energy which is absorbed by photosynthetic pigments
drives the process of photosynthesis. Photosynthetic pigments are organized into clusters, called
photosystems, for efficient absorption and utilization of solar energy in thylakoid membranes (Fig.

11.6).

Electron transfer

Reaction-
center

Photon cholorophy I!

Primary electron
acceptor

Reaction

Transfer Antenna
of energy pigment
(by resonance) molecules

Fig. 11.6: Light harvesting photosystem. Energy of light (photon) absorbed by photosynthetic pigment molecules is transferred from

molecule to molecule, and finally reaches the reaction centre where actual energy conversion begins.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Each photosystem consists of a light-gathering ‘antenna complex’ and a ‘reaction center’. The
antenna complex has many molecules of chlorophyll a, chlorophyll 6 and carotenoids, most of
them channeling the energy to reaction center. Reaction center has one or more molecules of
chlorophyll a along with a primary electron acceptor, and associated electron carriers of ‘electron
transport system’. Chlorophyll a molecules of reaction center and associated proteins are closely
linked to the nearby electron transport system. Electron transport system plays role in generation
of ATP by chemiosmosis (which will be discussed in later section). Light energy absorbed by the
pigment molecules of antenna complex is transferred ultimately to the reaction center. There the
light energy is converted into chemical energy.

There are two photosystems, photosystem | (PS I) and photosystem II (PS II). These are named
so in order of their discovery. Photosystem I has chlorophyll a molecule which absorbs maximum
light of 700 nm and is called P_,,, whereas reaction center of photosystem II has P,,, the form
of chlorophyll a which absorbs best the light of 680 nm. A specialized molecule called, primary
electron acceptor is also associated nearby each reaction center. This acceptor traps the high
energy electrons from the reaction center and then passes them on to the series of electron carriers.
During this energy is used to generate ATP by chemiosmosis.

In predominant type of electron transport called non-cyclic electron flow, the electrons pass
through the two photosystems. In less common type of path called cyclic electron flow only
photosystem | is involved. Formation of ATP during non-cyclic electron flow is called non-cyclic
phosphorylation while that during cyclic electron flow is called cyclic phosphorylation.

Non-cyclic Phosphorylation

1. When photosystem II absorbs light, an electron excited to a higher energy level in the reaction
center chlorophyll P,,, is captured by the primary electron acceptor of PS Il. The oxidized
chlorophyll is now a very strong oxidizing agent; its electron “hole” must be filled.

2. This hole is filled by the electrons which are extracted, by an enzyme, from water. This reaction
splits a water molecules into two hydrogen ions and an oxygen atom, which immediately
combines with another oxygen atom to form O., This water splitting step of photosynthesis that
releases oxygen is called photolysis. The oxygen produced during photolysis is the main source
of replenishment of atmospheric oxygen.

3. Each photoexcited electron passes from the primary electron acceptor of photosystem II to
photosystem | via an electron transport chain. This chain consists of an electron carrier called

(15) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

plastoquinone (Pq), a complex of two cytochromes and a copper containing protein called
plastocyanin (Pc).

4. As electrons move down the chain, their energy goes on decreasing and is used by thylakoid
membrane to produce ATP. This ATP synthesis is called photophosphorylation because it is
driven by light energy. Specifically, ATP synthesis during non-cyclic electron flow is called non-
cyclic photophosphorylation. This ATP generated by the light reactions will provide chemical
energy for the synthesis of sugar during the Calvin cycle, the second major stage of photosynthesis.

5. The electron reaches the “bottom” of the electron transport chain and fills an electron “hole” in
P_o the chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction center of photosystem |. This hole is created
when light energy is absorbed by molecules of P,,, and drives an electron from P,,,, to the
primary acceptor of photosystem I.

6. The primary electron acceptor of photosystem | passes the photoexcited electrons to a second
electron transport chain, which tmasmits them to ferredoxin (Fd), an iron containing protein.
An enzyme called NADP reductase then transfers the electrons from Fd to NADP. This is the
redox reaction that stores the high-energy electrons in NADPH. The NADPH molecule will provide
reducing power for the synthesis of sugar in the Calvin cycle.

The path of electrons through the two photosystems during non-cyclic photophosphorylation is
known as Z-scheme from its shape.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Energy of electron

re > Electron flow provides(__> tS
J energy forchemiosmotic C@ CD

synthesis

.
= i -
Yi a baal

PHOTOSYSTEM II

PHOTOSYSTEM |!

Fig 11.7: Non-cyclic electron flow during photosynthesis ATP, NADPH and oxygen are generated. The arrows trace the current of light-
driven electrons from water to NADPH. Each photon of light excites single electron, but the diagram tracts two electrons at a time, the
number of electrons required to reduce NADP+. The numbered steps are described in the text.

(17) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

NADP+

Primary

acceptor
NADP+
reductase

Energy for =a
chemiosmotic
synthesis of Photosystem!

Photosystem II

ESS SS SS SS SS SS SES SS SS

Fig. 11.8: Cyclic electron flow in box. Only PS | involved. ATP is generated but no NADPH and oxygen.

Chemiosmosis

In both cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation, the mechanism for ATP synthesis is
chemiosmosis, the process that uses membranes to couple redox reactions to ATP production.
Electron transport chain pumps protons (H*) across the membrane of thylakoids in case of
photosynthesis into the thylakoids space. The energy used for this pumping comes from the
electrons moving through the electron transport chain. This energy is transformed into potential
energy stored in the form of H* gradient across the membrane. Next the hydrogen ions move down
their gradient through special complexes called ATP synthase which are built in the thylakoid
membrane. During this diffusion of H* the energy of electrons is used to make ATP (Fig. 11.9).

Thylakoid interior
Stroma space (lumen)

Thylakoid interior space (lumen) Thylakiod

membrane

Proton (H+)

H,0 1/202 + 2@)

Pl i
astocyanin Proton

i emaeh ae ne

I) il

=
“a

sbseees, oO ‘
~)

meile tee rf

. /. ‘ee satay. 7 % ‘ts & & “iy a \y ; "
y ai

Thylakiod
membrane

stroma Hi)

Fig. 11.9 Electron Transport chain and chemiosmosis, coupling of ETC and formation of ATP by chemiosmosis.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Light independent (or Dark) Reactions

Calvin cycle : carbon fixation and reduction phase, synthesis of sugar

The dark reactions take place in the stroma of chloroplast. These reactions do not require light
directly and can occur in the presence or absence of light provided the assimilatory power in the
form of ATP and NADPH, produced during light reactions is available. Energy of these compounds
is used in the formation of carbohydrates from CO,, and thus stored their in. These reactions can
be summarised as follows (Fig. 11.10 ):

3CO, + 6NADPH + 9ATP —-> (CHO), + 6NADP + 9ADP + 9Pi +3H,O
(carbohydrate)

The details of path of carbon in these reactions were discovered by Melvin Calvin and his colleagues
at the University of California. Calvin was awarded Nobel Prize in 1961.

The cyclic series of reactions, catalyzed by respective enzymes, by which the carbon is fixed and
reduced resulting in the synthesis of sugar during the dark reactions of photosynthesis is called
Calvin Cycle.

The Calvin cycle can be divided into three phases: Carbon fixation, Reduction, and Regeneration
of CO, acceptor (RUBP) (Fig 11.10).

Phase 1: Carbon fixation: Carbon fixation refers to the initial incorporation of CO, into organic
material. Keep in mind that we are following three molecules of CO, through the reaction (because
3 molecules of CO, are required to produce one molecule of carbohydrate, a triose). The Calvin
cycle begins when a molecule of CO, reacts with a highly reactive phosphorylated five - carbon
Sugar named ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP). This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme ribulose
bisphosphate carboxylase, also known as Rubisco (it is the most abundant protein in chloroplasts,
and probably the most abundant protein on Earth). The product of this reaction is an highly unstable,
Six - carbon intermediate that immediately breaks into two molecules of three - carbon compound
called 3 - phosphoglycerate (phosphoglycerie acid-PGA). The carbon that was originally part
of CO, molecule is now a part of an organic molecule; the carbon has been “fixed”. Because the
product of initial carbon fixation is a three - carbon compound, the Calvin cycle is also known as C,

pathway.
V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Phase 2: Reduction: Each molecule of (PGA) receives an additional phosphate from ATP of light
reaction, forming 1,3 - bisphosphoglycerate as the product. 1,3 bisohosphoglycerate is reduced to
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate(G3P) by receiving a pair of electrons donated from NADPH of light
reactions. G3P is the same three-carbon sugar which is formed in glycolysis (first phase of cellular
respiration) by the splitting of glucose. In this way fixed carbon is reduced to energy rich G3P with
the energy and reducing power of ATP and NADPH (both the products of light-dependent reactions),
having the energy stored in it. Actually G3P, and not glucose, is the carbohydrate produced directly
from the Calvin cycle. For every three molecules of CO, entering the cycle and combining with 3
molecules of five-carbon RUBP, six molecules of G3P (containing 18 carbon in all) are produced. But
only one molecule of G3P can be counted as a net gain of carbohydrate. Out of every six molecules
of G3P formed, only one molecule leaves the cycle to be used by the plant for making glucose,
sucrose starch or other carbohydrates, and other organic compounds; the other five molecules are
recycled to regenerate the three molecules of five-carbon RuBP, the CO, acceptor.

Phase 3: Regeneration of CO2 acceptor, RUBP: Through a complex series of reactions, the carbon
skeletons of five molecules of three-carbon G3P are rearranged into three molecules of five-carbon
ribulose phosphate (RuP). Each RuP is phosphorylated to ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP), the very
five-carbon CO, acceptor with which the cycle started. Again three more molecules of ATP of light
reactions are used for this phosphorylation of three RUP molecules. These RUBP are now prepared
to receive CO, again, and the cycle continues.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Carbon Fixation

Glucose and
other organic
compounds

Fig. 11.10: The Calvin cycle occurs in stroma of chloroplast. Carbon is fixed and reduced to sugar.

: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

RESPIRATION

Living organisms need energy to carry on their vital activities. This energy is provided from within
the cells by the phenomenon of respiration. Respiration is the universal process by which organisms
breakdown complex compounds containing carbon in a way that allows the cells to harvest a
maximum of usable energy.

In biology the term respiration is used in two ways. More familiarly the term respiration means
the exchange of respiratory gases (CO, and O,) between the organism and its environment. This
exchange is called external respiration. The cellular respiration is the process by which energy is
made available to cells in a step by step breakdown of C-chain molecules in the cells.

Aerobic and Anaerobic Respiration

The most common fuel used by the cell to provide energy by cellular respiration is glucose,. The way
glucose is metabolized depends on the availability of oxygen. Prior to entering a mitochondrion,
the glucose molecule is split to form two molecules of pyruvic acid. This reaction is called glycolysis
(glycolysis literally means splitting of sugar), and occurs in the cytosol and is represented by the
equation:

2NAD 2NADH 5
Ce H20g ——~> 2C3H4,O3 + Energy

Glucose Pyruvic acid

This reaction occurs in all the cells and biologists believe that an identical reaction may have occurred
in the first cell that was organized on earth.

The next step in cellular respiration varies depending on the type of the cell and the prevailing
conditions (Fig. 11.11).

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

With oxygen Without oxygen

HO NAD*

NAD*

Fig. 11.11 Pyruvate, the end product of glycolysis, follows different catabolic pathways depending on the organism and the metabolic
condition.

Cell processes pyruvic acid in three major ways, alcoholic fermentation, lactic acid fermentation
and aerobic respiration. The first two reactions occur in the absence of oxygen and are referred
to as anaerobic (without oxygen). The complete breakdown of glucose molecule occurs only in the
presence of oxygen, i.e. in aerobic respiration. During aerobic respiration glucose is oxidized to CO,
and water and energy is released.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Anaerobic Respiration
(i) Alcoholic Fermentation: In primitive cells and in some eukaryotic cells such as yeast,
pyruvic acid is further broken down by alcoholic fermentation into alcohol (C, H, OH) and CO,

2NADH, 2NAD
2( C3;H,03) — => 2(C.H;OH)+ 2C0,
Pyruvic acid Ethyl Alcohol

(ii) Lactic acid fermentation: In lactic acid fermentation, each pyruvic acid molecule is
converted into lactic acid C, H, O, in the absence of oxygen gas:

2NADH, 2NAD

2( C3H,Os) 2( C3HOs)

Pyruvic acid Lactic acid

This form of anaerobic respiration occurs in muscle cells of humans and other animals during
extreme physical activities, such as sprinting, when oxygen cannot be transported to the cells as
rapidly as it is needed.

Both alcoholic and lactic acid fermentations yield relatively small amounts of energy from glucose
molecule. Only about 2% of the energy present within the chemical bonds of glucose is converted
into adenosine triphosphate (ATP).

Aerobic respiration (Discussed in detail under cellular respiration).

Role of mitochondria in respiration Mitochondria are large granular or filamentous organelles
that are distributed throughout the cytoplasm of animal and plant cells. Each mitochondrion is
constructed of an outer enclosing membrane and an inner membrane with elaborate folds or
cristae that extend into the interior of the organelle.

Mitochondria play a part in cellular respiration by transferring the energy of the organic molecules
to the chemical bonds of ATP. A large “battery” of enzymes and coenzymes slowly release energy

(25) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

from the glucose molecules. Thus mitochondria are the “Power houses” that produce energy
necessary for many cellular functions.

Adenosine triphosphate and its importance Adenosine triphosphate, generally abbreviated
‘ATP’ is a compound found in every living cell and is one of the essential chemicals of life. It plays
the key role in most biological energy transformations.

Conventionally, ‘P’ stands for the entire phosphate group. The second and the third phosphate
represent the so called “high energy” bonds. If these are broken by hydrolysis, far more free energy
is released as compared to the other bond in the ATP molecule. The breaking of the terminal
phosphate of ATP releases about 7.3 K cal. of energy. The high energy ‘P’ bond enables the cell to
accumulate a great quantity of energy in a very small space and keeps it ready for use as soon as
it is needed.

The ATP molecule is used by cells as a source of energy for various functions for example, synthesis
of more complex compounds, active transport across the cell membrane, muscular contraction,
and nerve conduction, etc.

Biological oxidation The maintenance of living system requires a continual supply of free energy
which is ultimately derived from various oxidation reduction reactions. Except for photosynthetic
and some bacterial chemosynthetic processes, which are themselves oxidation reduction reactions,
all other cells depend ultimately for their supply of free energy on oxidation reactions in respiratory
processes. Insome cases biological oxidation involves the removal of hydrogen, a reaction catalyzed
by the dehydrogenases linked to specific coenzymes. Cellular respiration is essentially an oxidation
process.

Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration may be sub-divided into 4 stages:

I. | Glycolysis li. Pyruvic acid oxidation
ili. Krebs cycle or citric acid cycle IV. Respiratory chain

Out of these stages the first occurs in the cytosol for which oxygen is not essential, while the other
three occur within the mitochondria where the presence of oxygen is essential.

V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

i. Glycolysis Glycolysis is the breakdown of glucose upto the formation of pyruvic acid. Glycolysis
can take place both in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic condition) or in the presence of oxygen
(aerobic condition). In both, the end product of glucose breakdown is pyruvic acid. The
breakdown of glucose takes place in a series of steps, each catalyzed by a specific enzyme. All
these enzymes are found dissolved in the cytosol. In addition to the enzymes, ATP and coenzyme
NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) are also essential.

Glycolysis can be divided into two phases, a preparatory phase and an oxidative phase (Fig. 11.12).
In the preparatory phase breakdown of glucose occurs and energy is expended. In the oxidative
phase high energy phosphate bonds are formed and energy is stored.

Preparatory phase The first step in glycolysis is the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP
to glucose. As a result a molecule of glucose-6 -phosphate is formed. An enzyme catalyzes the
conversion of glucose-6-phosphate to its isomer, fructose-6 - phosphate. At this stage another
ATP molecule transfers a second phosphate group. The product is fructose 1,6-bisohosphate. The
next step in glycolysis is the enzymatic splitting of fructose 1 ,6 -bisphosphate into two fragments.
Each of these molecules contains three carbon atoms. One is called 3 - phospo- glyceraldehyde,
3-PGAL or Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) while the other is dihydroxyacetone phosphate.
These two molecules are isomers and in fact, are readily interconverted by yet another enzyme of

glycolysis.

Oxidative (payoff) phase The next step in glycolysis is crucial to this process. Two electrons or
two hydrogen atoms are removed from the molecule of 3- phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL) and
transferred to a molecule of NAD. This is of course, an oxidation-reduction reaction, with the PGAL
being oxidized and the NAD being reduced. During this reaction, a second phosphate group is
donated to the molecule from inorganic phosphate present in the cell. The resulting molecule is
called 1,3 Bisphosphoglycerate(BPG).

The oxidation of PGAL is an energy yielding process. Thus a “high energy” phosphate bond is
created in this molecule. At the very next step in glycolysis this phosphate group is transferred toa
molecule of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) converting it into ATP. The end product of this reaction
is 3-phospho glycerate (3-PG). In the next step 3-PG is converted to 2-Phosphoglycerate (2PG).
From 2PG a molecule of water is removed and the product is phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP). PEP
then gives up its ‘high energy’ phosphate to convert a second molecule of ADP to ATP. The product
is pyruvate, pyruvic acid (C, H,O,). It is equivalent to half glucose molecule that has been oxidized
to the extent of losing two electrons (as hydrogen atoms).

(27) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

ii. Pyruvic add oxidation: Pyruvic acid (pyruvate), the end product of glycolysis, does not
enter the Krebs cycle directly. The pyruvate (3- carbon molecule) is first changed into 2-carbon
acetic acid molecule. One carbon is released as CO, (decarboxylation). Acetic acid on entering the
mitochondrion unites with coenzyme-A (Co A) to form acetyl Co A (active acetate). In addition, more
hydrogen atoms are transferred to NAD (Fig. 11.13).

iii. Krebs cyde or citric add cycle: Acetyl CoA now enters a cyclic series of chemical reactions
during which oxidation process is completed. This series of reactions is called the Krebs cycle (after
the name of the biochemist who discovered it), or the citric acid cycle. The first step in the cycle
is the union of acetyl CoA with oxaloacetate to form citrate. In this process, a molecule of CoA is
regenerated and one molecule of water is used. Oxaloacetate is a 4-carbon acid. Citrate thus has 6
carbon atoms.

After two steps that simply result in forming an isomer of citrate, isocitrate another NAD- mediated
oxidation takes place. This is accompanied by the removal of a molecule of CO,. The result
is a-ketoglutarate. It, in turn, undergoes further oxidation (NAD + 2H —> NADH) followed by
decarboxylation (CO,) and addition of a molecule of water. The product then has one carbon atom
and one oxygen atom less. It is succinate. The conversion of a-ketoglutarate into succinate is
accompanied by a free energy change which is utilised in the synthesis of an ATP molecule. The next
step in the Krebs cycle is the oxidation of succinate to fumarate. Once again, two hydrogen atoms
are removed, but this time the oxidizing agent is a coenzyme called flavin adenine dinucleotide
(FAD), which is reduced to FADH.,.

11. Bioenergetics

1.Phosphorylation of
glucose by ATP,

2-3 Rearrangement,
followed by a second
ATP phosphorylation ,

4-5. The six-tarbon
molecule is split into
two three-carbon
molecules-one GSP,

anolher DAP, that is
converted into 3p in
anoiher reaction.

SS LT

6. Oxidation followed by

two molecules pf BPG,

phosphate bond.

im cm i nm a

7.Reamoval of high energy
phosphate by two ADP
molacules produces two
ATP molecules and leaves

two 3PG molecules.

8-9 Removal of water yields
two PEP molecules,
each with a high-energy
phosphate bond.

10. Removal of high-energy
phosphate by two ADP |
molecules produces tw
ATP motecules and two |
pyruvate molecules.

phosphorylation produces
two NADH molecules and

each with one high-energy

ahiustose 6-phosphate
ATP > 3
ADP

eLearn.Punjab

Preparatory phase

Fructose 1, 6-biphosphate

Dihydroxyacete

4,
ie
—s
ne Glyceraldahyde 3-

phosphate (DAP) phosphate (G3P)

NADT
H*+ (NADH)

1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate

(BPG)
| 8

3-Phosphoglycerate
(3PG}

f

(BPG)
=) 2
ww 8
3-phosphoglycerate a
(APG) =
o

8)

—_

2-Phosphoglycerate 2-phosphoglycerate

(2PG)

(2PG)

Phosphoenol pyruvate Phosphoenol pyruvate

{PEP)
Ke

pyruvate

(PEP)

pyruvate

Fig. 11.12 Two phases of glycolysis. All of these reactions take place in the cytosol.

: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics

Oxidation of pyruvate

NAD
iy =
NADH S-CoA
Ce
CH
Acetyl-CoA (2
Kerbs cycle
The dehydrogenation HG
of malate produces a
third NADH, and the
cycle returns to its
starting point.
NADH 5
NAD’ -
Malate (4C)
HQ
Fumarate (4C}
FAD H, ~\
cS
FAD /
Succinate (dC) ie
The oxidation ‘GTP | GpP4P
of succinate =a
produces FADH,. ook

eLearn.Punjab

CoA-SH The cycle begins
when a 2C unit from
acetyl-CoA reacts
with a 4C molecule
(oxaloacetate) to

Cc) produce citrate (6C).

Mitochondrial

CoA4-SH membrane

Citrate (6C)

Isocitrate (6C) Oxidative
decarboxylation
produces NADH
with the release of

NAD O..

aoe oe

a-Ketoglutarate (SC)
NAD

“NADH

Asecond oxidative
decarboxylation produces
a second NADH with the
release of a second CO,

Fig. 11.13 Outline of the Krebs cycle. The brackets give the number of carbon atom in each intermediate of the cycle.

With the addition of another molecule of water, fumarate is converted to malate. Another NAD
mediated oxidation of malate produces oxaloacetate, the original 4-carbon molecule. This
completes the cycle. The oxaloacetate may now combine with another molecule of acetyl CoA to
enter the cycle and the whole process is repeated (Fig. 11.13).

- 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

iv. Respiratory chain: In the Krebs cycle NADH and H* are produced from NAD*. NADH then
transfers the hydrogen atom to the respiratory chain (also called electron transport system)
where electrons are transported in a series of oxidation-reduction steps to react, ultimately, with
molecular oxygen. (Fig. 11.14).

The oxidation reduction substances which take part in respiratory chain are:
i. A coenzyme called coenzyme Q

li. Aseries of cytochrome enzymes (b,C,a,a,)

lii. Molecular oxygen (0,)

Cytochromes are electron transport intermediates containing haem of related prosthetic groups,
that undergo valency changes of iron atom. Haem is the same iron containing group that is oxygen
carrying pigment in haemoglobin. The path of electrons in the respiratory chain appears to be as
follows.

Hig

Relative energy level

Low

Fig. 11.14 The repiratory electron transport chain and its coupling with oxidative phosphorylation.

(1) V: 1.1

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

NADH is oxidized by coenzyme Q. This oxidation yields enough free energy to permit the synthesis
of a molecule of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. Coenzyme Q is in turn oxidized by
cytochrome b which is then oxidized by cytochrome c. This step also yields enough energy to permit
the synthesis of a molecule of ATP. Cytochrome c then reduces a complex of two enzymes called
cytochrome a and as (for convenience the complex is referred as cytochrome a). Cytochrome a is
oxidized by an atom of oxygen and the electrons arrive at the bottom end of the respiratory chain.
Oxygen is the most electronegative substance and the final acceptor of the electrons. A molecule
of water is produced. In addition, this final oxidation provides enough energy for the synthesis of
a third molecule of ATP.

Oxidative phosphorylation: Synthesis of ATP in the presence of oxygen is called oxidative
phosphorylation. Normally, oxidative phosphorylation is coupled with the respiratory chain. As
already described ATP is formed in three steps of die respiratory chain (Fig. 11.14). The equation
for this process can be expressed as follows:

NADH + H*+ 3ADP + 3Pi+ 1/20, ——>NAD*+H,0+ 3ATP

Where Pi is inorganic phosphate.

The molecular mechanism of oxidative phosphorylation takes place in conjunction with the
respiratory chain in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. Here also, as in photosynthesis, the
mechanism involved is chemiosmosis by which electron transport chain is coupled with synthesis
of ATP. In this case, however the pumping/movement of protons (H*) is across the inner membrane
of mitochondrion folded into cristae, between matrix of mitochondrion and mitochondrion’s
intermembrane space. The coupling factors in respiration are also different from those in
photosynthesis.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

Glucose
Fructose 6-phosphate Activates
hosphofructokina
Inhibits nruciose Le pepncephete: Activates

eden da

Pyruvate

Pyruvate decarboxylase

ERS

Fig. 11.15 Stages in aerobic

respiration. Stage 1: Formation
of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate. Se ae

Stage 2: The Krebs cycle. Stage 3:
Respiratory chain and oxidative chemiosmosis

phosphorylation. Each pair of H
atoms entering the respiratory
chain as NADH yields 3 ATPs.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

EXERCISE

Q1. Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘false’ and write the correct statement if it is
false.

(i) Hydroponics are the plants grown in water culture.
(ii) | Calcium is an essential element for chlorophyll formation.

(iii) | Chlorosis means yellowing of leaves due to deficiency of certain essential element of
plant nutrition.

Q.2. Short questions.

(i) List four features of a leaf which show that it is able to carry out photosynthesis
effectively.

(ii) | Summarise the role of water in photosynthesis.

(iii) © What are T.W. Engelman and Melvin Calvin famous for?

(iv) | What is the difference between an action spectrum and an absorption spectrum?
(V) | What is the role of accessory pigments in light absorption?

(vi) When and why is there not net exchange of CO, and O, between the leaves and the
atmosphere?

(vii) What is the net production of ATP during glycolysis?

(viii) What is the main difference between photophosphorylation and oxidative
phosphorylation?

(ix) What is the location of ETC and chemiosmosis in photosynthesis and cellular
respiration?

(X) | How did the evolution of photosynthesis affect the metabolic pathway?

V: 1.1

Q.3.

11. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab

(xi)

How does absorption spectrum of chlorophyll a differ from that of chlorophyll b?

(xii) Why are the carotenoids usually not obvious in the leaves? They can be seen in the

leaves before leaf fall. Why?

(xiii) How is the formation of vitamin A linked with eating of carrot?

Extensive questions

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

Explain the roles of the following in aerobic respiration: (a) NAD+ and FAD (b) oxygen.

Sum up how much energy (as ATP) is made available to the cell from a single glucose

molecule by the operation of glycolysis, the formation of acetyl CoA, the citric acid
cycle, and the electron transport chain.

Trace the fate of hydrogen atoms removed from glucose during glycolysis when
oxygen is present in muscle cells; compare this to the fate of hydrogen atoms
removed from glucose when the amount of the available oxygen is insufficient to
Support aerobic respiration.

Sketch Kreb’s cycle and discuss its energy yielding steps.

Describe various steps involved in oxidative break down of glucose to pyruvate.
Sketch respiratory electron transport chain. Discuss the significance of ETC.

Compare photosynthesis with respiration in plants.

Explain the difference between the cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation
with the help of Z scheme.

Give an account of light-independent reactions of photosynthesis.

(35) V: 1.1

CHAPTER

Animation.12.1: Nutrition

Source & Credit:

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Allorganisms need nutrients for the maintenance of their lives. Nutrient is the food or any substance
that supplies the body with elements, necessary for metabolism. Certain nutrients (carbohydrates,
fats and proteins) provide energy other nutrients (water, electrolytes, minerals and vitamins) are
essential to the metabolic process. The sum total of all the processes involved in the taking in and
utilization of elements by which growth, repair and maintenance of activities in the organism are
accomplished maintenance of activities in the organism are accomplished is called nutrition.

Organisms can be divided into two classes on the basis of their methods of nutrition-autotrophic
and heterotrophic. Autotrophic organisms can exist in an exclusively inorganic environment
because they can manufacture their own organic compounds from the inorganic raw material taken
from the surrounding media. This means that they produce their own sugars, lipids, proteins etc.
from carbon dioxide, water and nitrates. Heterotrophic organisms are incapable of manufacturing
organic compounds from simple inorganic nutrients and so they obtain organic molecules from
the environment in the form of food.

AUTOTROPHIC NUTRITION

See chapter 6 and chapter 11

Mineral nutrition in plants

Generally, all autotrophic or photosynthetic organisms need carbon dioxide and water, which
supply the carbon, oxygen and hydrogen. These are the predominant elements, the plant needs for
the synthesis of organic molecules. There are many other elements that enter into the composition
of plants. Nitrogen for example, is present in proteins, phosphorus is present in ATP, nucleic
acids and many other important compounds; chlorophyll contains magnesium and cytochromes
contain iron. Where does the green plant obtain these elements it needs? Obviously not from
carbon dioxide and water, but the soil is the main source of these nutrients. These are essential for
the growth and life of the plant. Crops fail to flourish, if grown repeatedly in the same field unless
soil is replenished with these nutrients. The farmers replace these by spreading animal manure,
sewage Sludge or artificial fertilizers in measured quantities over the field. Some chemical fertilizers
that are commonly used in Pakistan are urea, super phosphates, ammonium nitrate etc.

@) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
Mineral Element Deficiencies

It is very difficult or not possible to ascertain the effects of individual minerals in both plants
and animals. However, the deficiencies of some elements cause serious diseases showing clear
symptoms. For example nitrogen deficiency in soil results in the stunted growth and strong chlorosis
(lack of chlorophyll) particularly in older leaves. Deficiency of phosphorus causes stunted growth of
roots. Soil deficient in potassium causes leaf margins yellow and brown in colour and premature
death of the plant. Deficiency of magnesium results in chlorosis. Many economically important
plant diseases due to mineral deficiency are now catalogued with the help of colour photography,
enabling rapid diagnosis.

HETEROTROPHIC NUTRITION

METHODS OF PLANT NUTRITION
The plants generally obtain their food from the air or the water in which they grow. There are,
however, some special methods of nutrition , which are described below.

Saprophytic Nutrition

Feeding on dead and decaying matter such as dead leaves in the soil or rotting tree trunks is
called saprophytic nutrition and derives its nutrients from host plants. They produce extracellular
enzymes, which digest the decaying matter and then absorb the soluble products back into their
cells. Some bacteria break down the proteins of dead plants and animals and release nitrates which
are taken up by the plant roots and then built into new amino acids and proteins, thus helping in
nitrogen cycle.

Parasitic Nutrition

Feeding by living in or on other organism (host) belonging to different species is called parasitic
nutrition. Parasites attach themselves to living things or their host, for nourishment. For obtaining
nourishment from higher plant the parasite penetrates its suckers in the conducting tissue of the
host. Puccinia is a parasitic fungus that destroys the wheat plant. Dodder (Cuscuta)is a leafless
plant that lives as a twining parasite.

@) V: 1.1

Symbiotic Nutrition

It is a mutual nutrition between organisms living in association with one another. These organisms
belong to two different species. Some important examples are lichens, mycorrhiza and root nodules
with nitrogen fixing bacteria. The lichen is made up of a fungus and alga cells. The alga makes
food by photosynthesis, while the fungus supplies water and minerals and also protection against
desiccation (Fig. 12.1). Mycorrhiza is an association between a fungus and roots of higher plants.
The fungus depends upon the photosynthate of the plant. The benefit derived by mycorrhiza plant
is not properly understood. However, it is known that the
plants with mycorrhiza association show better growth
than those without fungal partner. Leguminous plants
have nodules on their roots, which contain nitrogen fixing
bacteria (Fig. 12.2). The bacteria live on the plant material
and fix nitrogen, converting it into nitrates, which the
plant uses.

Possibly the Mycorrhizal fungus
benefits the plant by decomposing
organic material in the soil and
providing water and minerals such as
phosphorous to plant.

Fig. 12.1. Lichens. Fig. 12.2. Nodules on leguminous plant roots.

Nutrition in insectivorous plants. There are a few plants that supplement their inorganic diet
with organic compounds. These organic compounds are obtained by trapping and digesting insects
and small animals. All of the insectivorous plants are true autotrophs, but when they capture prey,
their growth becomes rapid. Apparently, nitrogenous compounds of animal body are of benefit
to these plants. In some plants, the trapped insects are decomposed by bacteria. In others the
trapped insects are digested by enzymes secreted by the leaves. The plants absorb the nitrogenous
compounds thus formed.

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Pitcher plant (Sarracenia pupurea) has leaves modified into a sac or a pitcher, partly filled with
water (Fig. 12.3). The end of the leaf is modified to form a hood, which partly covers the open
mouth of the pitcher. Small insects that fall into the pitcher are prevented from climbing out by
numerous stiff hairs. The proteins of trapped insects are decomposed by bacteria or enzymes and
the products of this decay are absorbed by the inner surface of the pitcher leaf.

Venus-fly trap (Dionaea muscipula) The leaf is bilobed with midrib between them. There is a
row of long stiff bristles along the margins of each lobe. When an insect touches small sensitive
hairs on the surface of the leaf, the lobes quickly come together with their bristles interlocked. The
trapped insect is then digested by the enzymes secreted from the glands on the leaf surface and
the products are then absorbed (Fig. 12.4).

Fig.12.3 Pitcher plant (Saracenia pupurea). several fruit flies are entrapped within the leaf.

G) V: 1.1

Fig. 12.4 Leaf of Venus fly trap (Dionaea muscipula) (a) Fly is about to trigger the hair.
(b) The two halves of the leaf trapping the fly.

(Drosera intermedia) shows another type of modification of leaf for insectivorous activity
(Fig. 12.5). The tiny leaves bear numerous hair like tentacles, each with a gland at its tip. The insects,
attracted by the plant’s odour are entagled. As in the above mentioned example, in sundew also
the proteins of insects are digested by enzymes and the products are absorbed.

Fig. 12.5 Leaf of Sundew (Drosera intermedia) A dragonfly is caught in the sticky fluid on the ends on the leaf of the glandular hair.

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Methods of Animal Nutrition

In large animals, every cell of the body needs nourishment, yet most cells cannot leave their position
in the body and travel to a food source, so the food must be delivered. The digestive system provides
the body with water, electrolytes, and other nutrients. To do this, digestive system is specialized to
ingest food; propel it through the digestive tract; digest the food; and absorb water; electrolytes
and other nutrients from the lumen of the digestive tract. Undigested matter from the food is
moved out of the digestive tract.

Animals exhibit more variety of nutrition as compared to the plants. On the basis of nutrition
animals may be classified as:

Detritivores: The animals which feed on detritus (organic debris from decomposing plants and
animals) are called detritivores. Earthworm is the common example of detritus feeder. It ingests
fragments of decaying organic matter especially vegetation either at the soil surface or during
burrowing activity.

Herbivores: Animals that feed on plants are called herbivores. Typical herbivores include insects,
reptiles, birds and mammals. Two important groups of herbivorous mammals are rodents and
ungulates. The later are hoofed grazing animals, such as horses, cattle and sheep. In herbivorous
mammals the premolars and molars have large grinding surfaces. There is a large gap between
the incisors and premolars. Canines are missing. In grazing and browsing herbivores, i.e. deer and
sheep, there are no upper incisors.

Carnivores: Animals which feed on other animals are called carnivores. They have large canine
teeth for catching and tearing the prey. Incisors , premolars and molars are all adapted for cutting
flesh, cracking bones and reducing the chunks to sizes suitable for swallowing. Cats, dogs, lions
and tigers are common examples of carnivores. A
predator is an animal, which captures and readily
kills live animal for its food. The animal, which is
eaten, is the prey.

Omnivores: These are the animals which eat both plant and animal food. Example of omnivores
are crows, rats, red fox, bears, pigs and man. They have the teeth structurally and functionally
intermediate between the extremes of specialization attained by the teeth of herbivores and

carnivores.
@) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Filter feeders: Many aquatic animals filter the water and digest the particles that they extract
from it.

A common mussel possesses two large gills covered with cilia. The movement of cilia causes a
current of water to enter animal via an inhalent siphon (Fig. 12.6). The water, which enters, contains
the food, such as microscopic algae and protozoa. Secretory cells scattered among cilia produce
sticky mucus which entangles food particles. The trapped food particles are then swept towards
the mouth by the ciliary movement. Certain types of whales are also filter feeder.

ent
iphon

Anus Exhal

ills

Foot
Fig. 12.6 Filter feeding in mussel

Fluid feeders: When the food is ingested in liquid form the animals are classed as fluid feeders.
Aphids and mosquitoes are the examples. Aphids suck the phloem juices out of the green stems
by inserting their delicate stylets. The female mosquito is also a fluid feeder because it sucks blood
from the skin capillaries by piercing the skin with the help of tubular mouth parts.

Macrophagous feeders: Animals, which take in food in the form of large pieces, are
macrophagous feeders. Tentacular feeding, scraping and seizing prey are the common methods of
macrophagous feeding. Feeding in Hydra is the example of tentacular feeding.

Scraping type of feeding occurs in the garden snail (Helix). It feeds by using rasping organ, the
radula. Leaves are held by the lips of the snail. The radula moves back and forth over the leaves

V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

with its teeth scraping the food. In this way tiny fragments of leaves are obtained which are gradually
pushed backward towards the pharynx. Seizing and swallowing type of macrophagous feeding is
found in spotted dogfish.

Parasitic Nutrition

A parasite is an organism that lives upon or within another organism, called the host, for obtaining
its food. A parasite that lives upon the host is an ectoparasite and that which lives within the host is
an endoparasite. If an organism lives parasitically at all times, it is said to be an obligate parasite.
Facultative parasites are capable of living independently of its host at times.

Flea and lice are ectoparasites that live in the fur or feafhers of mammals and birds and suck blood
from their skin. Ticks and mites are common ectoparasites in non-human mammals. In plants,
aphid is a parasite that sucks food from leaves or stems.

Leech is another common example of ectoparasite attacking both aquatic and terrestrial animals.

Endoparasites also occur in both aquatic and terrestrial animals. These parasites are most commonly
found in the intestine of vertebrate host, including man, where they absorb host's digested food.
Entamoeba histolytica, tape worm and round worms are common examples of endoparasites. In
certain cases the host may be weakened by the presence of parasite or its metabolism may be
upset by the excretory products of parasite.

DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION

All animals have similar requirements, although these requirements differ in detail. Animals must
have the supply of water, oxygen, simple sugars, amino acids, fatty acids, vitamins and many other
inorganic and organic substances. These substances, except oxygen and water, are rare in the
natural environment and are not directly available to the organisms. In nature these substances are
available in the form of proteins, starches, fats, vitamins and minerals. As such, these moleculesr
except vitamins and minerals are of no use unless they are broken down or digested into simple
molecules such as amino acids, sugars and fatty acids so that they many pass through the cell
membrane and be used by the body. The characteristic processes involved in holozoic nutrition
are defined as

() V: 1.1

(a) !ngestion taking in of complex food.

(b) Digestion- the breakdown of complex organic compounds of food into simpler diffusible
molecules by the action of enzymes e.g. proteins (meat, fish, eggs etc.) into amino acids. Digestion
may be either Intracellular or extracellular. In intracellular, break down of food occurs within the
cells. In extracellular digestion, enzymes are secreted outside the cell into the gut cavity or lumen
where then digestion takes place.

(c) Absorption is the uptake of the diffusible food molecules from the digestive region across the
membrane in to the cell or into the blood stream.

(d) Assimilation is the utilization of the products of digestion for production of energy or
synthesis of cellular material.
(e) Egestionis the elimination of undigested matter from the body.

Animation 12.2: Digestion and Absorption
Source and Credit:

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Digestion in Amoeba

Amoeba proteus has intracellular mode of digestion and feeds on many kinds of tiny organisms
which live with it in fresh water ponds and shallow lakes. Amoeba also feeds on particulate organic
matter. Food may be ingested at any points on the surface of the body. When Amoeba comes in
contact with food particle, it immediately puts out pseudopodia around it. These pseudopodia fuse
together around the food particle forming the food vacuole (Fig. 12.7). If the food particle is too
big, such as Paramecium, Amoeba encircles it, thus forming a large food vacuole. The food vacuole
undergoes many changes as digestion proceeds. First it grows smaller, then larger and again
smaller. Lysosomes, which contain hydrolytic enzymes, fuse with the food vacuole and enzymes
are secreted into it. The first phase of digestion is killing and softening of food that take place
in the acidic medium (approximately pH 5.6) and later it becomes alkaline (about pH 7.3) during
which digestion is completed. When digestion is complete in food vacuole membrane is drawn
into numerous fine canals. The products of digestion are passed into the canals and finally into
the surrounding cytoplasm and subsequently utilized in various metabolic reactions of the animal.
Undigested matter is voided from the organism in the surrounding water by egestion at any point
of its surface (Fig. 12.8).

Food
vacuole

Food particale Ese isopedim | (9) / ae

Fig. 12.7 Amoeba ingesting food by pseudopodia

@) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

2. Vacuole decreases in
size as a result of water

SA

3. Enzymes discharge a | \Ne

into’ food vacuole

‘ by lysoso mes |

Fig. 12.8. Ingestion, digestion and absorption in Amoeba
Digestion in Hydra
Hydra is an aquatic, diploblastic cnidarian. it has vase-like body composed of two principal layers of
cells. The central cavity of the body functions as a digestive cavity. The animal has only one opening
to the outside called mouth which is surrounded by mobile tentacles. The digestive cavity of this
sort is called gastrovascular cavity or coelenteron (Fig. 12.9a).


12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Tentacile

Cedchoel (tregepedh

Mucous
cell

Digestive cell, 27) = Nematocyst
ee Gestrodermis

Dead prey

Gestrovascular cavity

Undischarged Discharged

(a) (b)

Fig. 12.9. Hydra: (a) Longitudinal section showing the detail of wall and the gastrovascular cavity (b) neniatocysts (discharged and
un-discharged)

Embedded in the tentacles are numerous stinging cells called nematocysts. Each nematocyst
consists of a hollow thread coiled within a capsule and a tiny hair-like trigger, projecting outside
(Fig. 12.9 b).

When a prey such as Daphnia or Cyclops comes in contact with the cnidocil the hollow thread of the
nematocyst turns inside out, ejects poison and the prey is paralysed or some times killed. Hydra
then grasps its prey with its tentacles and pushes it into the digestive cavity through open mouth.

The glandular cells in the gastrodermis secrete enzymes which start extracellular digestion.
Gastrodermal flagellate cells and contraction of body cavity help in mixing food with enzymes
and breaking up into fine particles. These fine particles are then engulfed by phagocytic action of
gastrodermal cells where digestion is completed intracellularly in the digestive vacuoles. Indigestible
food is expelled out from the gastrovascular cavity via mouth. Such a digestive system is called sac-
like digestive system having a common opening for ingestion and egestion.

@) V: 1.1

Animation 12.4: Hydra
Source and Credit:

Digestion in Planaria

Planaria is free-living, flatworm found in fresh water streams and ponds. There is a single gut opening,
the mouth which is located on the ventral surface near the middle of the animal. The mouth opens
into a muscular tubular pharynx, which leads into the intestine. The intestine then immediately
divides into three branches - an anterior one, extending forward and two lateral branches. Each

of these main branches gives off numerous small branches which end blindly called caecae (Fig.
12.10).


12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Nervous tissue

Nerve cords

Pharynx

Fig. 12.10. Planaria showing much branched gastrovascular cavity and extruded pharynx.

Planaria engulfs the prey by protruding eversible pharynx through the mouth and pushes it into
the gastrovascular cavity. Food is then digested in the intestine. Enzymes are secreted by the gland
cells of the intestine and continue the process of extracellular digestion. Small particles of food are
finally engulfed by phagocytic cells. Digestion is completed intracellularly, from where the products
of digestion pass to the rest of the body ,by the process of diffusion. Branched intestine also
facilitates diffusion of materials in to body cells. Undigested food is egested through the mouth.

Digestion in Cockroach

The digestive system of cockroach is of tubular type. It can be divided into fore, mid and hind gut.
The foregut includes mouth cavity, pharynx, crop and gizzard. A pair of salivary glands is present in
the thorax region of the animal. They secrete saliva, which is poured into the mouth cavity. The mid
gut is ashort narrow tube called mesenteron stomach. Short finger like hollow tubes, the hepatic
caecae open into the anterior end of the midgut.

The hind gut is a long coiled tube, the terminal part of which is a thick walled chamber, the rectum,
which opens to the exterior through anus (Fig. 12.11).

(5) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

pharynx Eyes

Salivary gland
Salivary reservolr :

Oesophagus

Mesenteron
Malpighian

tublues - Rectum

Lleum
Colon

Fig. 12.11. Cockroach digestive system

The cockroach feeds on all types of food. After cutting the food into small pieces with the help of
mandibles, it is mixed up with saliva in the mouth cavity. The digestive enzymes of saliva hydrolyse
the starchy matter contained in food. The partly digested food is stored in the crop. Food leaves the
crop chunk by chunk and after being ground in the gizzard it moves into the midgut. The enzymatic
secretions of hepatic caecae and midgut digest the food completely. The indigestible food after
temporary storage in the rectum, as fecal matter is then egested out through anus.

V: 1.1

Cockroach has a tubular digestive system having mouth for ingestion and anus or cloacal aperture
for egestion. It is more efficient system than sac like digestive system having specialized organs or
partitions for efficient digestion and absorption of food.

Animation 12.6: Cockroach
Source and Credit: tumblr

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Digestion in Man

The digestive system of man consists of a long coiled tube that extends from the mouth to the
anus. The main parts in the direction of passage of food, are the oral or buccal cavity, esophagus,
stomach, small intestine (duodenum, jejunum and ileum), large intestine (ascending colon,
transverse colon, descending colon, caecum and rectum). (Fig. 12.12) Associated with the
various regions are the glands, especially salivary glands, liver and pancreas. There are three
sites of digestion in the digestive system of man - oral cavity, stomach and small intestine.

Fig. 12.12 The digestive system of man.

Digestion in Oral Cavity There are several functions of the oral cavity, the most obvious being
the (a) selection of food, (6) grinding or mastication (c) lubrication and (cd) digestion.

Selection of food: When food enters the oral cavity (the cavity bounded by palate, tongue, teeth
and cheeks) it is tasted, smelled and felt. If the taste or smell is unpleasant or if hard objects like

V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

bone or dirt are present in the food, it is rejected. Oral cavity is aided in selection by the senses of
smell, taste and sight. Tongue being sensory and muscular organ plays the most important role in
selection of food through its taste buds.

Grinding or mastication: After selection, the food is ground by means of molar teeth into
smaller pieces. This is useful because : (a) the esophagus allows relatively small pieces to pass
through and (b) small pieces have much more surface for the enzyme to attack.

Lubrication and digestion: These are the main functions of the oral cavity accomplished by
Saliva. Saliva is secreted by three pairs of salivary glands namely sublingual glands situated below
the tongue; submaxillary glands behind the jaws and parotid glands in front of the ears. Saliva
produced by these glands contains three important ingredients.

i) Water and mucus, _ ii) Sodium bicarbonate and some other salts, iii) Carbohydrate digesting
enzymes, amylase or ptyalin.

Water and mucus together make a slimy liquid which serves to moisten and lubricate the food so
that it can be chewed efficiently and passed through the esophagus smoothly.

Sodium bicarbonate and some other salts are slightly antiseptic but their main function is to stablilze
the pH of food. Fresh saliva is alkaline with a pH nearly 8, quickly loses carbon dioxide and gets to
DH 6. Ptyalin is a carbohydrate - digesting enzyme, which digests starch and glycogen to maltose.

Swallowing: As a result of mastication, the softened, partly digested, slimy food mass is rolled
into small oval lump called bolus, which is then pushed to the back of the mouth by the action of
tongue and muscles of phaynx which ensure that the food does not enter the windpipe. Following
are the events which occur during swallowing:

i) the tongue moves upwards and backwards against the roof of the mouth, forcing the bolus to
the back of the mouth cavity.

ii) The backward movement of the tongue pushes the soft palate up and closes the nasal opening

at the back. At the same time the tongue forces the epiglottis (a flap of cartilage) into more or
less horizontal position thus closing the opening of the windpipe (the glottis).

V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Fig, 12.13 Swallowing in man

iii) The larynx, cartilage round the top of the windpipe moves upward under the back of the tongue.
iv) The glottis is partly closed by the contraction of a ring of muscle.

v) The food does not enter the partly open glottis, because the epiglottis diverts the food mass to
one side of the opening and safely down the esophagus. The beginning of the swallowing action
is voluntary, but once the food reaches the back of the mouth, swallowing becomes automatic.

The food is then forced down the esophagus by peristalsis (Fig. 12.13).

Peristalsis These are characteristic movements of the digestive tract by which food is moved along
the cavity of the canal. It consists of the wave of contraction of the circular and longitudinal muscles
preceded by the wave of relaxation thus squeezing the food down along the canal. Peristalsis starts
just behind the mass of food from the buccal cavity along the esophagus to the stomach and then
along the whole alimentary canal (Fig. 12.14). Occasionally, the movements are reversed, with the
result food may be passed from the intestine back into the stomach and even into the mouth.
This movement is called antiperistalsis, leading to vomiting. Hunger contractions are peristaltic
contractions which are increased by low blood glucose levels and are sufficiently strong to create
an uncomfortable sensation often called a “hunger pang”. Hunger pangs usually begin 12 to 24
hours after the previous meal or in less time for some people.

V: 1.1

Fig. 12.14 Different stages of
peristaltic movement in the
esophagus.

Digestion in stomach

At the junction between esophagus and the stomach there is a special ring of muscles called cardiac
sphincter. When the sphincter muscles contract, the entrance to the stomach closes and thus
prevents the contents of the stomach from moving back into the esophagus (Fig. 12.15a). It opens
when a wave of peristalsis coming down the esophagus reaches it.

The stomach is situated below the diaphragm on the left side of the abdominal cavity. It is an elastic

muscular bag that stores food from meals for some time, making discontinuous feeding possible.
It also partly digests the food.

(21) V: 1.1

Heart burn, or Pyrosis, is a
painful burning sensation in the
chest usually associated with the
back flush of acidic chyme into
the esophagus. This is due to
overeating, eating fatty food, lying
down immediately after a meal,
consuming too much _ alcohol,
caffeine or smoking.

Gastric pits

(b) Section through stomach wall (c) Detail of gastric gland in the stomach wall

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Animation 12.7: Stomach Digestion
Source and Credit: gifsoup

The stomach wall is composed of three principal layers: an outer layer of connective tissue; middle
layer of smooth muscles and inner layer (mucosa) of connective tissue with many glands. The
middle layer of muscles consists of outer longitudinal and inner circular muscles (Fig. 12.15 b).
These muscular layers help in churning and mixing the food with the stomach secretions. The
mucosa of the stomach possesses numerous tubular gastric glands,which are composed of three
kinds of cells;

a) mucous cells, thatsecrete mucus, b) parietal or oxyntic j¢ more protein is present in the food it stimulates
cells secrete hydrochloric acid and c) zymogen cells, the production of gastrin hormone from the gastric
. . . . endocrine lining, which is carried by blood to the
which secrete pepsinogen (Fig. 12.15c). The secretion ociiite ltuaels Guts) GAIUGIeS dia) to pIeSUee
of all these cells is collectively called gastric juice. The more gastric juice. Thus more proteins more
secretion of the gastric juice is regulated by smell, sight 8577 974 more gastric juice for aigestion.

and quality of food.

Mucus is a thick secretion that covers the inside of the stomach. It prevents the underlying walls
from being digested.

Hydrochloric acid is secreted in concentrated form. It adjusts the pH of stomach contents ranging
from 2-3 for the pepsin to act on proteins. It also softens the food and kills many microorganisms

taken in along with the food.
3) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Pepsin is an enzyme secreted in an inactive form called pepsinogen. Pepsinogen is activated to
pepsin when exposed to the acidic medium or to some already activated pepsin. Pepsin hydrolyzes
protein to yield peptones and polypeptides.

The muscles of stomach wall thoroughly mix up the food with gastric juice and eventually convert it
to semi-solid mass called chyme. Gradually the stomach empties into the duodenum through the
relaxed pyloric sphincter.

Digestion in small intestine
Small intestine in man consists of duodenum, jejunum and ileum. Duodenum is about 20-25 cm

long, which leads into jejunum and then Hepatic and Pancreatic secretions are also stimulated by a hormone

ileum. When chyme passes from stomach called secretin, which is produced by the intestinal mucosa on the entry

. . as . of acidic food from stomach. The acidity stimulates secretin production
into duodenum, its acidity stimulates the in duodenum and secretin is carried by blood to pancreas which is

release of secretions from pancreas, liver stimulated to produce pancreatic juice. Secretin also inhibits gastric
and duodenal cells. secretion.

Pancreas is a large gland whose exocrine tissue secretes a juice that flows through pancreatic duct
into the duodenum. Included in this juice are enzymes that digest all principal components of food
i.e. carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Carbohydrate- digesting enzyme is pancreatic amylase also
called amylopsin, which digests starch into maltose. Fat digesting enzyme is lipase, that hydrolyzes
a small percentage of fats into fatty acids and glycerol. Like pepsin, trypsin is also secreted as
inactive trypsinogen, which is activated by enterokinase, an enzyme secreted by the lining of the
duodenum.

Animation 12.8: Pancreas
Source and Credit:

V: 1.1

Animation 12.9: Digestion in small intestine

Source and Credit:

Trypsin splits proteins into peptones and polypeptides. Pancreatic juice also contains sodium
bicarbonate, which partly neutralizes the chyme coming from the stomach. This is necessary
because enzymes of the pancreas do not work well in acid conditions.

Liver secretes bile, which may be temporarily stored in the gall bladder and released into the
duodenum through the bile duct. The bile is green, watery fluid. It contains no enzymes, but its
green colour is due to the bile pigments, which are formed from the breakdown of hemoglobin in
the liver. The bile also contains bile salts, which act on fats, and emulsifies them. It means that they
break them up into small globules, which are then easily digested by water-soluble lipase.

If bile pigments are prevented from leaving digestive The liver is easily ruptured because it is large, fixed in
tract, they may accumulate in blood, causing a position, and fragile or it may lacerate by a broken rib.
. . . Liver rupture or laceration may result in severe internal
condition known as jaundice. Cholesterol, secreted pjeeqing. The liver may become enlarged as a result of heart
by the liver, may precipitate in the gall bladder to malfunctioning, hepatic cancer or may be damaged due to
. hepatitis or being alcoholic.
produce gall stones, which may block release of

bile.

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

jejunum is the second portion of the small intestine extending from the duodenum to the ileum.
It is about 2.4 meter in length comprising about two fifth of the small intestine. Lower three fifth of
the small intestine from jejunum is the ileum.

The food, which escapes undigested from the duodenum, is completely digested in the jejunum
and ileum by a group of enzymes contained in the intestinal juice. The overall picture of enzymes in
the human digestive system, their substrates and final products is as follows.

Absorption of food

As we know that small intestine consists of duodenum, jejunum and ileum. Nearly all absorption
of the products of digestion takes place in the ileum. The internal surface of ileum has many folds,
which exhibit velvety appearance due to the presence of numerous finger-like outgrowths called
villi ( Fig. 12.17 a & b). Each villus is richly supplied with blood capillaries and a vessel called lacteal
of lymphatic system with a covering of epithelial cells. Electron microscope reveals that these cells
have countless, closely packed cylindrical processes, microvilli (Fig. 12.17 c). The total area of
absorption becomes incredibly large due to the enfolding, villi and microvilli. Simple Sugars and
amino acids are absorbed by diffusion or active transport into the blood capillaries through the
microvilli. Some of the fatty acids and glycerol are also absorbed into blood stream. However, a
large proportion of fatty acids and glycerol enter the epithelial cells of villi, where they recombine
into fats. These fats then enter the lacteals. Proteins present in lymph vessels combine with fat
molecules to form lipoprotein droplets. These pass
into blood stream via thoracic lymphatic duct. The lipo-
proteins are subsequently hydrolysed by blood plasma
enzyme and enter body cells, where they may be used
in respiration or stored as fat in the liver, muscle of
under the skin.

V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Vein carrying
blood to

hepatic portal
vessel

Large

Intestinal wall (a) Villi (b) Epithelial cells

Fig. 12.17. (a) Part of wall of small intestine showing glands and vilii.
(b) Detail of villus structure.

Animation 12.10: Digestion of food
Source and Credit: sciproject-1-4

@)

: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Animation 12.11: Absorption of
food

Source and Credit:

The intestinal contents are pushed along the alimentary canal by normal peristaltic activity. At the
end of ileum, there is an ileocolic sphincter that opens and closes time to time to allow a small
amount of residue from the ileum to enter the large intestine.

Large intestine : The large intestine is composed of a caecum, colon and rectum. Caecum is a
blind sac that projects from the large intestine between ileum and colon. From the blind end of the
caecum there arises a finger like process called appendix. The appendix, some times gets inflamed
due to entrapping and then purification of food causing appendicitis, which has to be removed
Surgically in many instances.

V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

The material that passes from the small intestine to the large intestine contains a large amount
of water, dissolved salts and undigested material. Water and salts are absorbed into blood, while
undigested material is rejected as feces. The fecal matter contains a large number of bacteria, plant
fibers, slouged off mucosal cells, mucus, cholesterol, bile pigments and water. Large intestine also
harbors a large population of useful bacteria that synthesize some vitamins especially vitamin K,
which are absorbed in blood. If the absorption of water and salts does not take place due to infection,
drug action or emotional disturbance, a condition known as diarrhoea occurs. If this condtion
is unchecked, dehydration develops that may prove to be fatal. The other extreme condition is
constipation, which is caused by the excessive absorption of water.

Rectum is the last part of large intestine, where feces are temporarily stored and rejected through
anus, at intervals. Anus is surrounded by two sphincters, the internal is of smooth and outer of
striped muscles. Under normal condtions, as the rectum is filled up with feces, it gives rise to
defecation reflex. This reflex can be consciously inhibited in individuals other than infants. Gradually
the child learns to bring this reflex under control.

V: 1.1

Oral Cavity
Teeth
grinding of
Lips and cheeks communication.
Saliva from buccal glands
Manipulation of food; hold food | (mucus only).
in position between the teeth;
communication.
Some mucus; small amount of
Manipulation of food; holds|serous fluid.
food in position between the
teeth; cleansing teeth; taste
Salivary Glands Secretion of saliva through} Saliva with amylase
Parotid gland ducts to posterior portions of
oral cavity.

Submandibular Secretion of saliva in floor of} Saliva, with amylase
glands Oral cavity.

Sublingual glands Secretion of saliva in floor of|}Saliva with mucus only.
oral cavity.

from pharynx to stomach
Mechanical mixing of food;

enzymatic digestion; storage;
absorption.

Mucous cells Protection of stomach wall by| Mucus
mucus production

Parietal cells Decrease in stomach pH. Hydrochloric acid.
Zymogen cells Protein digestion. Pepsinogen
Endocrine cells Regulation of secretion and|Gastrin

motility.


12. Nutrition

Accessory Glands
Liver

Gallbladder

Pancreas

Small Intestine

Duodenal glands

Goblet cells

Absorptive cells

Endocrine cells

Large intestine
Goblet cells

eLearn.Punjab

Secretion of bile into duodenum | Bile

Bile storage; absorbs water and | No secretions of its
electrolytes to concentrate bile. | own, stores and

concentrates bile.
Secretion of several digestive |Trypsin, chymotrypsin,
enzymes and bicarbonate ions] pancreatic amylase, pancreatic
into duodenum. lipase, bicarbonate ions.

Protection Mucus
Protection Mucus

Secretion of digestive enzymes | Enterokinase, amylase,
and absorption of digested|peptidases, sucrase,
materials. maltase,

lactase, lipase.
Regulation of secretion and|Gastrin, secretin,
motility.

Absorption, storage, and food |Mucus
movement.
Protection

SOME COMMON DISEASES RELATED TO NUTRITION

Dyspepsia

Incomplete or imperfect digestion is called dyspepsia. This is not a disease in itself but symptomatic
of other disorders or diseases. This is characterized by abdominal discomfort, flatulence, heartburn,
nausea and vomiting. These symptoms may occur irregularly and in different patterns from time to
time. Dyspepsia may occur due to excessive acidity in stomach or faulty function of stomach and
intestine or insufficient quality or quantity of bile secretions.

@1) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Food poisoning

This term indicates an illness from indigestion of food containing toxic substances. One of the
commonest causes of food poisoning are the toxins produced by bacteria, Salmonella and
Campylobacter. These bacteria live in the intestines of cattle, chicken and duck without causing
disease symptoms. Humans, however, may develop food poisoning if they drink milk, eat meat or
eggs which are contaminated with these bacteria. The symptoms of food poisoning are diarrhoea,
vomiting and abdominal pain. They occur from 12-24 hours after eating contaminated food.
Infection is most likely, if unpasteurized milk is drunk or if meat is not properly cooked.

The liquid that escapes during defrosting frozen meat contains Salmonella bacteria. The dishes and
utensils while the meat is defrosting must not be allowed to come in contact with any other food.

Asevere form of food poisoning is botulism. This is caused by toxins produced by bacteria known as
Clostridium botulinum. Botulism develops by the use of improperly canned or otherwise preserved
foods, especially meat. The toxin produced by these bacteria is very powerful and has selective
action on central nervous system, causing cardiac and respiratory paralysis. The early symptoms
of this diseases are fatigue, dizziness, double vision, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and
abdominal pain.

Obesity

It is the term employed when a person has abnormal amount of fat on the body. If one eats too
much food than body requirement, the surplus is stored as fat so becomes overweight or obese.
There is fat stored in adipose tissue in the abdomen, around the kidneys and under the skin.
Certain cells accumulate drops of fat in their cytoplasm. As these drops increase in size and number,
they join together to form one large globule of fat in the middle of the cell, pushing the cytoplasm
into thin layer and the nucleus to one side. Groups of fat cells form adipose tissue. Some people
never seem to get fat no matter how much they eat, while others lay down fat when their intake
only just exceeds their need. The explanation probably lies in the balance of hormones which, to
some extent, is determined by heredity. An obese person is much more likely to suffer from high
blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, stomach disorder than a person who has normal
body weight.

Anorexia Nervosa

This term is employed to the loss of appetite due to the fear of becoming obese. Such a feeling is
common in human females between the age of 12 and 21 years. Fear does not diminish even when
weight is dropped to dangerous level. Psychiatric therapy is usually required when patient refuses

to eat.
(2) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

Anorexia is an illness which largely affects girls usually just after the onset of puberty. The illness
is characterized by the loss of appetite due to the fear of becoming obese. An anorexic girl over
estimates the size of her own body and so insists that she is over weight when in reality her weight
has dropped to a dangerous level. These girls are often immature psychologically and unable to cope
with the challenges of puberty and their emerging sexuality. The loss of feminine characteristics
enable the girls to retreat into a child like state in which they feel safe. Psychiatric therapy is usually
required to treat anorexic girls. Such patients are fed through any route other than alimentary
canal that is intramuscularly or intravenously. The recovery is very slow. It may take 2-4 years and
in some cases longer.

Bulimia Nervosa

It is neurotic disorder in slightly older girls. It is characterized by bouts of over eating fattening
food such as fried food or cream cakes. This voracious eating is followed immediately by self-
induced vomiting, fasting or purgatives. The frequent vomiting and purging may cause physical
effects including serum electrolyte imbalance and frequent recurring infections. Treatment of
bulimics is likely to be prolonged. The initial treatment is to overcome the effects of weight loss and
malnutrition. It is necessary to undertake the treatment in hospital under strict supervision.

Piles

Piles or hemorrhoids are masses of dilated, tortuous veins in the anorectal mucosa. These masses
may some times start bleeding during bowel movements. Situation may aggravate when the patient
suffers from constipation. The urge to defecate is depressed and it becomes difficult to expel the
faeces. This may cause other symptoms of ill health because of the physical distension of the-
rectum. The only therapy required is the improvement of the hygiene and the use of food softeners,
such as roughage, in food or laxatives. The patients are advised not to sit on hard seats. Depending
on severity of the symptoms, sometimes the hemorrhoids have to be removed surgically

Ulcer

The inner wall of digestive tract is normally covered with mucus, which protects it from enzymes.
When the mucus layer breaks down the digestive enzymes begin to eat away the walls of stomach
or duodenum. This results in a sore called ulcer. Occasionally, an ulcer is so severe that a hole
develops in the wall of the digestive tract and the contents of the tract spill into the abdominal
cavity, leading to severe infections which may prove to be fatal, if immediate medical care is not
sought.

Excessive secretion of gastric acid secretion is an important factor of peptic ulcer. Smoking, spicy
food, alcoholic beverages, coffee, tea and stress should be avoided by the patients suffering from

ulcer.
(33) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

EXERCISE

Q.1 Fill in the blanks
(i) Plants absorb minerals intheir ==—=—=——s form, as found in the soil.
(ii) In plants the most common nutrient deficiencies are o f __ ;
i -| 0 | ©
(iii) A plant requires_ _for holding its cell together.

(iv) | Most of the organic material in a plant is __
(v) Chlorosis is usually caused by insufficient__
(vi) In the trapped insects are decomposed by bacteria.

(vii) | The structure in the mouth that prevents food from entering the nasal
cavities is the

(viii) Thestomach functionsto _——s ana food andits
(ix ) ___ is the common example of detritivore.
(x) Pancreas produces_———C hich Stimulates the conversion of glycogen to
(xi) Vomiting occurs due to ____ movements.
Q.2 Short Questions
(i) What is the advantage of a digestive tract as compared with a digestive cavity?

(ii) What are functions of human liver?

(iii) | What measures should be taken to avoid food poisoning?

V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

(iv) Can we get along without large intestine? if not why?

Extensive questions

(i) Define nutrition. Describe the role of different elements in plant nutrition.

(ii) a) Distinguish between saprophytic and parasitic modes of life, (b) i. Name one
parasitic plant, ii. Describe its method of nutrition, explaining why normal
nutrition is not possible.

(iii) What are heterotrophs? Describe different methods of nutrition in heterotrophs.

(iv) | What are the advantages and disadvantages of the parasitic mode of life
compared with that of a free living organism.

(v) Why is digestion necessary? Describe what happens to a meal containing fats,
carbohydrates and proteins while it is in the stomach of man.

(vi) What is holozoic nutrition? Describe the characteristics processes involved in
holozoic nutrition giving the example of Amoeba.

(vii) | How do (i) the saliva, (ii) the pancreas, (iii) the liver help in the digestion of the
food of man? Draw a diagram of the digestive system to show the positions of

the pancreas and the liver.

(viii) Make a labelled diagram of the alimentary and digestive glands in cockroach.
What are the functions of the glands you sketch?

(ix) Describe the structure and functions of human stomach.
(x) How do the digestive tract of herbivores differ from those of carnivores?
(xi) | What prevents the wall of stomach from being digested?

(xii) What specialized features of your small intestine account for the efficient
absorption of digested foodstuffs?

(35) V: 1.1

12. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab

(xiii) W hat is the contribution of liver and pancreas in the process of digestion?
(xvi) How can we control obesity?

(xv) How is gastric juice production regulated?

CHAPTER

13

Gaseous
Exchange

Animation 13.1: Gaseous Exchange

ource & Credit: Wikispaces

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

NEED OF RESPIRATORY GAS EXCHANGE

At all levels of activities in living organisms an uninterrupted supply of energy is required. Respiration
is one of the most important metabolic activities of all organisms. Respiration occurs at two levels, i.e,
organismic and cellular level. Organismic respiration is also known as breathing or ventilation. The
cellular respiration is directly involved in the production of energy, necessary for all living activities.
Cellular respiration is the process by which cell utilizes oxygen, produces carbon dioxide, extracts and
conserves the energy from food molecules in biologically useful form, such as, ATP.

ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
GAS EXCHANGE IN AIR AND IN WATER

Exchange of gases during organismic respiration is carried out only by diffusion. Respiratory gases
are exchanged between body fluid and outside medium which may be water or air. There is no active
transport mechanism to move respiratory gases across biological membranes. For that matter, air is
better respiratory’ medium than water. Oxygen can be obtained more easily from air than from water
because of many reasons.

Firstly, the oxygen content of air is much higher than the oxygen content of equal volume of water. A
liter of water cannot contain even 10 ml of oxygen whereas oxygen content of fresh air is about 200 ml
per liter. Secondly, oxygen diffuses about 8000 times more quickly in air than in water.

Breathing or ventilation is directly involved in the exchange of gases .The ventilation of water is far
more difficult than the ventilation of air, because water is 8000 times more dense than air .In terms
of viscosity the water is 50 times more viscous, which makes it more difficult for exchange of gases as
compared to air.

Plants like animals also get their energy from respiration. In plants, in contrast to animals, no special
organ or system is present for gaseous exchange as they exist in higher animals. Every cell of plant
carries out exchange of gases according to its needs. The transport system of plants which includes
conducting tissues i.e. xylem and phloem is not involved in the transport of gases in the plants.
In most cells of mesophyll which are specialized for photosynthesis, there are present large air
spaces. These air spaces are directly involved in gaseous exchange. Stomata are the main sites of
exchange of gases in plants. Stomata are largely present in the leaves and in young stem. In older
stems, cork tissue is present which is formed of dead cells. The cork tissue has special pores called
lenticels which are involved in gaseous exchange. Land plants get their oxygen directly from air which
enters through stomata. Enormous number of stomata are. present on the leaves. It is estimated
that there are 12000 stomata per square centimeter of leaf surface in Tobacco plant. These stomata
lead to the intercellular spaces (spaces between cells) of mesophyll tissue. The air spaces are
comparable to honey comb. These
air spaces may comprise up to 40% Guard cells Apertures (stomata)
of the total volume of the leaf. The
exchange of gases between and the
moist surface of mesophyll cells
takes place promptly (Fig 13.1). The
roots of the land plants get their
oxygen from the air existing in the
spaces between the soil particles.
Aquatic plants obtain their oxygen
by diffusion from dissolved oxygen
in water.

Fig. 13.1 Stomata on leaf surface

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

Photorespiration and its Consequences

Respiratory activity which occurs in plants during daytime is called photorespiration. In the process
of photorespiration carbon dioxide is released and oxygen is absorbed. The oxygen absorbed is
not useful to produce energy such as ATP. In other words photorespiration is a light dependent
process during which oxygen is absorbed and carbon dioxide is released. This oxygen is derived
from the early reaction of photosynthesis.

The photorespiration is a process in which ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco)
fixes oxygen instead of carbon dioxide which results in lowering the overall rate of carbon dioxide
fixation and plant growth.

Ribulose 1,5 bisphosphate (RuBP) reacts with oxygen in photorespiration

The first step of photorespiration during which RuBP reacts with oxygen is carried out by rubisco,
the most abundant protein in chloroplasts and probably the most abundant protein in the world.
The rubisco is carboxylase as well as oxygenase. When rubisco acts as carboxylase it adds carbon
dioxide to RuBP, which is an accepter molecule. On the other hand when rubisco is oxygenase
it adds oxygen to RuBP. Both these reactions compete with each other. When RuBP reacts with
oxygen, a two carbon compound glycolate is produced.

RuBP + O, > Glycolate

Theglycolatethus produced diffuses into the membrane bounded organellesknown as peroxisomes.
In the peroxisomes the glycolate is converted into glycine, through a series of reactions.

Glycolate -——> glycine
The glycine is the simplest amino acid which soon after its formation diffuses into the mitochondria
where two glycine molecules are converted into serine and synthesis a molecule of carbon dioxide

is formed.

2 glycine — serine + CO,

(4) V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

The pathway in which RuBP is converted into serine is called photorespiration. The process of
photorespiration uses ATP and NADPH produced in the light reactions just like Calvin-Benson
cycle. But, in fact, photorespiration is reverse of Calvin cycle. During photorespiration carbon
dioxide is released instead of fixation into carbohydrates. In most plants photorespiration reduces
the amount of carbon fixed into -carbohydrates by 25%.

In a hot and dry day the level of oxygen inside the leaf rises. This is because the stomata close to
prevent the loss of water. The level of carbon dioxide falls because it is being consumed and the
level of oxygen rises because closed stomata do not let it go out.

It is interesting that apparently the photorespiration reduces the photosynthetic process and it is
not essential for plants and many plants grow normally without the process of photorespiration. It
is also observed that if photorespiration is inhibited chemically, the plant can, still grow. Then why
does photorespiration exist? The common simple answer to this question is that the active site of
rubisco is evolved to bind both carbon dioxide and oxygen together. Originally it was not a problem
as there was little oxygen in the atmosphere and the carbon dioxide binding activity was the only
one used. The photorespiration started when the quantity of oxygen became more.

RESPIRATORY ORGANS IN REPRESENTATIVE
AQUATIC AND TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS

Properties of respiratory surfaces in animals
Respiratory surfaces in animals are the sites where gaseous exchange takes place. The respiratory
surfaces in most animals exhibit the following features :

1. Large surface and moisture:
The surface area should be extremely large and kept moist as it is seen in the lungs in the land
vertebrates and in the gills in the case of fishes.

2. Thin epithelium:

The distance across which diffusion has to take place should be little. In most animals the epithelium
which separates air and blood is only two cell thick. As a result the distance for diffusion is very

short.
(5) V: 1.1

3. Ventilation:
Ventilation maintains a steep diffusion gradient. There is

a big difference in the concentration of the gases at two
points which brings about diffusion.

4. Capillary network:

The respiratory site should possess extensive network of
capillaries through which blood should flow all the fime at
an adequate speed. In this way steep diffusion gradient is
maintained which helps in rapid diffusion of oxygen.

rh

vill
|
_
=
4
=

=

—
5

——

=!
iat

Respiration in Hydra

Hydra has no specialized organs for respiration. Exchange
of gasesi.e., intake of oxygen and removal of carbon dioxide,
occurs through the entire general surface in contact with
water. Exchange of oxygen in and carbon dioxide out also
occurs in cells lining the digestive cavity. In this way the
surface lining of the enteron acts., as an efficient respiratory

surface (Fig. 13.2).

Fig 13.2 Respiration in Hydra

Animation 13.2: Hydra
Source and Credit:

Animation 13.3: hydra
Source and Credit:

Respiration in Earthworm

Although earthworm is much complex than hydra, yet it does not have any specialized respiratory
organs. The exchange of gases occurs mainly through skin. Skin is richly supplied with blood capillaries
and is always kept moist by the secretion of epidermal mucous gland cells and also by coelomic
fluid exuding out through the dorsal pores. Oxygen dissolved on the wet surface passes through
the cuticle and epidermal cells into the blood. In the blood, oxygen combines with haemoglobin
to form oxyhaemoglobin.Oxyhaemoglobin releases up oxygen at the tissue level. In earthworm,
blood does not come into direct contact with tissue cells so oxygen must diffuse through the tissue
fluids and coelomic fluids. Carbon dioxide is removed from the tissues by the blood and carried in
the plasma to skin, from where it is excreted ((Fig. 13.3)

Animation 13.4: Respiration in Earthworm

Source and Credit:

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

(b) The oxygen combines with
haemoglobin and is carried
to all the cells of the body

by the circulatory system.
(a) Oxygen diffuses through xy
the outer cells of the skin
and the walls of the \ — \
capillaries into the blood. OQ \/ ;
=

Naw oo ae er ot yd (d) Carbon dioxide from body
cells diffuses into the blood.

(c) From the capillaries of the skin,
the carbon dioxide diffuses out of
the blood and through the outer
skin cells to the outside of the
body.

Fig. 13.3 Respiration in Earthworm

RESPIRATION IN COCKROACH
Cockroach has specialized organs for respiration. The respiratory system of the cockroach is very
specialized. It consists of branching systems of air tubules called tracheae lined by chitin. The main
tracheal trunk communicates with exterior by 10 pairs of apertures called spiracles, present on

the lateral sides of the body. Two pairs are in thorax while the rest eight are in each of the eight

V:

abdominal segments. The main tracheae divide
and subdivide forming very fine thin-walled
tubules called tracheoles. These tracheoles end
into blind ducts partly filled with fluid, in which
the oxygen dissolves. These surround the organs
and the tissues and directly supply oxygen to the
living cells. A concentration gradient is set up
between them and the spiracular openings and
oxygen diffuses into the trachea from the outside
air. The movement of the air through the tracheal
trunks transfers gases through inspiration and
expiration. Air is pumped in and out of the
tracheae by the expansion and contraction of
the abdominal muscles (Dorsoventral muscles).
When abdomen expands, the first four pairs
of spiracles open, air rushes in through these
spiracles into tracheoles. Abdomen contracts, the
anterior four pairs of spiracles close and posterior
Six pairs of spiracles open. This forces air through
the tubes and eventually out of the body. In this
way exhalation and inhalation take place. From
the spiracles air enters into trachea and then
tracheole, from where gaseous exchange between
tissue cells and air in tracheole takes place. Thus
air is directly supplied through tracheoles to the
tissue cells. Blood is not involved in transport of
gases(Fig.|3.4).

Cuticle

Hypodermis

Spiracie |

(|
TI
Tracheoles
Trachea
Chitinous
lining

Nucleus of
tracheal end cell

———— Tracheae

7 Ventral trachea

As Dorsal trachea

| — = Spiracles

Fig. 13.4 Respiration in Cockroach

13. Gaseous Exchange

Animation 13.5: COCKROACH

Source and Credit:

eLearn.Punjab

: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

Respiration in fish

Fish respires through the gills which are paired structures present on either side of the body almost
at the junction of head and trunk. Gills are most effective and highly modified for gaseous exchange
in aquatic animals. They are in four to five pairs which may open through gill slits and are visible on
the surface of the pharynx (cartilaginous fish) or are placed in bronchial cavities which are covered
by operculum. Gills have great surface area for gaseous exchange. The gill surface is all the time
ventilated by constant flow of water. Heart pumps the blood directly to the gills from where
oxygenated blood is carried to all the parts of the body. The deoxygenated blood from different
parts of the body is received by heart. The heart of the fish is single circuit and the blood flows in
only one direction. The blood enters the posterior side of heart and after passing through different
chambers it is pumped into the gills. Water enters through the mouth and after passing over the
gills move out of the body through the gill openings (Fig. 13.5)

Gill arches
(under
opercular flap )

Water ce

el

—_
TT Led Gill rakers

operculum

Gill arch Gill filaments

Fig. 13.5 Water flows unidirectionally over the gills of a fish.

(11) V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

Respiration in Frog

In frog, the gaseous exchange occurs through the lungs, by skin, and buccal chamber which are
richly supplied with blood vessels. The gaseous exchange through the skin is known as cutaneous
respiration.

Gaseous exchange through the lungs is called pulmonary respiration. In frog the air enters
through the nostrils, when the nostrils are open; the mouth is closed. After entry of air the nostrils
close, the floor of buccal cavity is raised, air is pushed into the lungs. This intake of air is known as
inhalation or inspiration. Expiration occurs exactly in reverse order in sequence of inspiration.

Open extrenal nostril

Closed external nostril

Internal nostril

Tongue

Floor of buccal
Lung cavity lowered

(a) (b)

floor raised

Fig. 13.6 Two stages in inspiration (buccal respiration)

Animation 13.7: Respiration in Frog
Source and Credit: clipartbest

(12) V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

Lungs in frog are simple sacs almost like balloon when they are fully expanded. The inner surface
of lung is increased by thin walled air chambers. The walls of these air chambers are richly supplied
with capillaries. These blood containing areas in the lungs are the main sites for gaseous exchange.
The consumed air after gaseous exchange moves out of the lungs through the nostrils. The removal
of consumed air out of the lungs, after gaseous exchange has occurred, is called exhalation or
expiration (Fig. 13.6).

Respiration in birds
Respiratory system in birds is the most efficient and elaborate. The birds are very active animals
with high metabolic rate, and thus need large amount of oxygen. The respiratory system in the birds
is SO arranged that there is one way flow of the air through the lungs and the air is renewed after
inspiration. In the lungs of birds, tiny thin walled ducts called parabronchi are present instead of
alveoli. These parabronchi are open at both ends and the air; is constantly ventilated. The walls of the
parabronchi are chief sites of gaseous
exchange. The direction of the blood
flow in the lungs is opposite to that of the
air flow through the parabronchi. This
counter current exchange increases the
amount of oxygen which enters blood.
Lungs in birds are very efficient in this
respect as well, because no stale of air
remains in the parabronchi.

The lungs have also developed several
extensions knownasairsacswhichreach

ie

“hy,

all parts of the body and even penetrate Air space ».

some of the bones. In most birds the air in bone
sacs are nine in number which become
inflated by air at atmospheric pressure
when the rib articulations are rotated
forward and upward. The inflated air
sacs act as bellows and send air into the
parabronchi for gaseous exchange.

Fig. 13.7 The Respiratory System of Bird

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

Respiration in man

In man respiratory system includes lungs and air passages which are responsible for carrying fresh
air to the respiratory sites.

Air Passage Ways

Air passage ways consist of nostrils, nasal cavities, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles
and alveolar ducts which ultimately lead into the alveolar sac. Nasal cavities are lined with mucous
membrane of ciliated epithelium. Each nasal cavity is subdivided into three passage ways by the
projection of bones from the walls of the internal nose. Air enters the nasal cavity through nostril
and the larger dust particles are trapped by the hair and mucus in the nostrils. Air, while passing
through the nasal cavity, becomes moist, warm and filtered of smaller foreign particles by mucous

V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

membrane. The nasal cavity leads into the throat or pharynx by two internal openings. The pharynx
is a muscular passage lined with mucous membrane. The air is channelized from the pharynx into
the larynx.

The larynx or voice box is a complex cartilaginous structure surrounding the upper end of the
trachea. One of the cartilages, the epiglottis has a muscularly controlled, hinge-like action and
serves as a lid which automatically covers the opening of the larynx during the act of swallowing so
as to prevent the entry of food or liquids into the larynx. The opening of larynx is called glottis and
is also lined with mucous membrane. In the glottis the mucous membrane is stretched across into
two thin edged fibrous bands called vocal cords, which help in voice production, when vibrated by
air.

Open jaws ; | closes
ene Backward movement
to throat of tonne forces
épiglottis inte
VA horizontal position
a8
- Epiglottis diverts
Epagiottis food mass away
pete from opening
Spinal of larynx

colanin Laryns move
forward and upward

Trachea Esophagus under tongue,

(a) Breathing To lungs. (b) Swallowing Te stomach

Fig. 13.8 Events in the throat associated with breathing (a) and swallowing (b). The commonly held belief that the epiglottis closes
downward upon the larynx when food is swallowed is not quite true. The closure is probably never complete; the degree of closure
is determined partly by the backward movement of the tongue during swallowing (which forces the epiglottis into a more or less
horizontal position) and partly by the upward movement of the larynx (which brings it up under the epiglottis). Food does not enter
the partly open larynx and obstruct breathing primarily because the epiglottis diverts the food mass to one side of the opening and
safely down the esophagus.

The trachea or wind Pipe is a tubular structure lying ventral to the oesophagus and extends to the
chest cavity or thorax where it is divided into right and left bronchi. In the wall of trachea there
are a series of C shaped cartilage rings which prevent the trachea from collapsing and keep the
passage of air open. Each bronchus on entering the lung divides and subdivides progressively into

(15) V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

smaller and smaller bronchi. When the smaller bronchi attain a diameter of one mm or less, then
they are called bronchioles. Bronchi have thesame cartilage rings as the trachea, but the rings are
progressively replaced by irregularly distributed cartilage plates and the bronchioles totally lack
cartilages. Bronchioles are made up of mainly circular smooth muscles.

The bronchioles continue to divide and subdivide deep into the lungs and finally open into a large
number of air-sacs. Air-sac is the functional unit of the lungs. Each air-sac consists of several
microscopic single layered structures called alveoli. Overlying the alveoli there is a rich network of
blood capillaries to produce an excellent site for the exchange of gases.

The lungs are closed sacs that are connected to the outside by way of the trachea and the nostrils
or mouth. Lungs are spongy because of the presence of millions of alveoli. Lungs are placed in
the chest cavity. Chest cavity is bounded by ribs and muscles on the sides. The floor of the chest is
called diaphragm.Diaphragm is a sheet of skeletal muscles. Lungs are covered with double layered
thin membranous sacs called pleura (Fig. 13.9).

Fig. 13.9 Human respiratory organs

V: 1.1

Animation 13.9: Respiratory System
Source and Credit:

Breathing is a process in which fresh air containing more oxygen is pumped into the lungs and air
with more carbon dioxide is pumped out of the lungs. In other words breathing is a mechanical
process consisting of two phases, inspiration and expiration. During inspiration, fresh air moves in
and in expiration air with low O, and high CO, content moves out of the lungs. During rest breathing

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

occurs rhythmically at the frequency of 15 to 20 times per minute in humans. To understand the
mechanism of breathing we should keep in mind three aspects related to lungs and associated
structures.

1. Lungs are spongy in nature. The lungs themselves neither pull air in nor can they push it out.
During inspiration passive expansion of elastic lungs occurs and expiration is due to a passive
contraction of lungs.

2. The floor of the chest cavity is diaphragm, which is a muscular sheet. The snape of the
diaphragm is more domelike when its muscles are relaxed. On the other hand when the
muscles of the diaphragm contract its shape becomes less domelike.

3. Walls of the chest cavity are composed of ribs and intercostal muscles. When muscles between
the ribs contract, the ribs are elevated and when muscles between ribs are relaxed the ribs
settle down.

Inspiration
During inspiration the space inside the chest cavity is increased in two ways. Firstly, the muscles of
ribs contract and elevate the ribs upwards and forwards and secondly, the muscles of diaphragm

aE ee, SSS Diaph Fay Mm SS SS SS
Fig. 13.10 Movement of Diaphragm

V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

also contract and diaphragm becomes less domelike. This downward movement of diaphragm
and outward and upward movement of the ribs causes increase in the chest cavity and reduces
pressure. When the pressure from the lungs is removed they expand. With the expansion of the
lungs vacuum is created inside the lungs in which the air rushes from the outside due to higher
atmospheric pressure. This is called inspiration (Fig. 13.10,13.11)

Expiration
During expiration the muscles of ribs are relaxed and the ribs move downward and inward. In
this way from the sides of chest cavity the space becomes less. At the same time the muscles
of diaphragm also relax becoming more domelike
and the chest cavity is also reduced from the floor.
This reduction in space of the chest cavity exerts
pressure on the lungs. When lungs are pressed the
qir inside lungs moves out of the lungs and this is
expiration. (Fig. 13.10, 13.11)

Inspiration Expiration

Thoracic cavity

Thoracic cavity i
raduces

expands

External intaroostal

External intercostal
act muscles relax

muscles contr

Diaphragm

Diaphragm
contracts

Fig. 13.11

V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

TRANSPORT OF RESPIRATORY GASES

Intake of oxygen and release of carbon dioxide by blood passing through capillaries of alveoli is
brought about by the following factors.

1. Diffusion of oxygen in and carbon dioxide out occurs because
of difference in partial pressures of these gases.

2. Within the rich network of capillaries surrounding the alveoli,
blood is distributed in extremely thin layers and, therefore,
exposed to large alveolar surface.

3. Blood in the lungs is separated from the alveolar air by extremely thin membranes of the
capillaries and alveoli.

Transport of Oxygen

In human beings the respiratory pigment is haemoglobin. It is contained in the red blood corpuscles.
Haemoglobin readily combines with oxygen to form bright red oxyhaemoglobin. Oxyhaemoglobin
is unistable and splits into the normal purple-red coloured haemoglobin and oxygen in the
conditions of low oxygen concentration and less pressure.Carbonic anhydrase enzyme present in
R.B.C. facilitates this activity. In this way haemoglobin acts as an efficient oxygen carrier. A small
proportion of oxygen also gets dissolved in the blood plasma.

Hb +O, HbO,
<_<

Haemoglobin can absorb maximum oxygen at the sea level. The maximum amount of oxygen
which normal human blood absorbs and carries at the sea-level is about 20mI/100ml of blood. This
is the maximum capacity of haemoglobin for oxygen when it is fully oxygenated. Under normal
conditions, blood of alveoli of the lungs is not completely oxygenated. When an oxygen tension is
115mm mercury, haemoglobin is 98 percent saturated and, therefore, contains 19.6 ml of oxygen
per 100ml of blood. This means that haemoglobin can be almost completely oxygenated by an
oxygen pressure of 100 mm mercury, which is present in the lungs. Any higher oxygen pressure
would have the same result. When oxygen pressure falls below 60 mm mercury, as in many cells and
tissues, the oxygen saturation of haemoglobin decreases very sharply. This results in the liberation

V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

of large quantities of oxygen from haemoglobin. In
this way in the tissue where oxygen tension is low
oxyhaemoglobin dissociates rapidly.

There are three important factors which affect the capacity of haemoglobin to combine with oxygen.

1. Carbon dioxide

When carbon dioxide pressure increases, the oxygen tension decreases, the capacity of haemoglobin
to hold oxygen becomes less. In this way increased carbon dioxide tension favours the greater
liberation of oxygen from the blood to the tissue.

2. Temperature
Rise in temperature also causes a decrease in the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood, e.g., in the
increased muscular activity.

3. pH

The pH of blood also influences the degree to which oxygen binds to haemoglobin. As the pH of the
blood declines, the amount of oxygen bound to haemoglobin also declines. This occurs because
decreased pH results from an increase in hydrogen ions, and the hydrogen ions combine with the
protein part of the haemoglobin molecules, causing a decrease in the ability of haemoglobin to
bind oxygen. Conversely, an increase in blood pH results in an increased ability of haemoglobin to
bind oxygen.

Transport of Carbon Dioxide

Carbon dioxide is more soluble than oxygen and
dissolves freely in the tissue fluid surrounding the
cells. From the tissue fluid, dissolved carbon dioxide
passes to the plasma within the blood capillaries.

Carbon dioxide is transported in the blood in several different states.

1. Some of the carbon dioxide (about 20%) is carried as carboxyhaemoglobin. Carboxyhaemoglobin
is formed when carbon dioxide combines with amino group of haemoglobin.

2. Other plasma proteins also carry about 5% carbon dioxide from the body fluids to the capillaries

of lungs.
(21) V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

3. About 70% carbon dioxide is carried as bicarbonate ion combined with sodium in the plasma. As
carbon dioxide from tissue fluid enters the capillaries it combines to form carbonic acid.

Corbonic anhydrase

co, + h,O F > co

2 2 3

The carbonic acid splits quickly and ionizes to produce hydrogen ions and bicarbonate ions.
H,COo, : H* + HCO,

When blood leaves the capillary bed most of the carbon dioxide is in the form of bicarbonate
ions. All these reactions are reversible. In the lungs bicarbonate ions combine with hydrogen ions
to form carbonic acid which splits into water and carbon dioxide. It is this carbon dioxide which
diffuses out from the capillaries of the lungs into the space of alveolar sac.

HCO, + H* ; H,CO CO + H,O

3 2 3 2 2

4, Small amount of carbon dioxide is also carried by corpuscles combined with potassium.

Carbon Dioxide Concentration

in Arterial And Venous Blood

It has been found that arterial blood contains about 50 ml of carbon dioxide per 100 ml of blood
whereas venous blood has 54 ml of carbon dioxide per 100 ml of blood. In this way each 100 ml
of blood takes up just 4 ml of carbon dioxide as it passes through the tissues and gives off 4 ml of
carbon dioxide per 100 ml of blood as it passes through the lungs.

Respiratory Disorders

Cancer

Many problems in the respiratory system can take place if inside lining is exposed continuously
to unhealthy air, containing smoke and other pollutants. Lung cancer is one of the most serious
diseases of respiratory system. Cancer or carcinoma is basically malignant tumor of potentially
unlimited growth that expands locally by invasion and systemically by metastasis. Cancer can
occlude respiratory passages as the tumor replaces lung tissue. Smoking especially in young adults
is the most potential threat of lung cancer. The chances of lung cancer are ten times more in those

(22) V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

persons who smoke or live in smoky and congested areas as compared to those who do not smoke.
It is now estimated that 90% of lung cancer is caused by smoking. Recent research indicates that
more than ten compounds of tar of tobacco smoke are involved in causing cancer.

Tuberculosis

Tuberculosis is a disorder of respiratory system. In fact, it is the general name of a group of diseases
caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Pulmonary tuberculosis is a disease of lungs in which inside
of the lung is damaged resulting in cough and fever. It is more common in poor people. Malnutrition
and poor living conditions facilitate Mycobacterium to grow. The disease is curable with proper
medical attention. It is a contagious disease.

Asthma

Asthma is a serious respiratory disease associated with severe paroxysm of difficult breathing,
usually followed by a period of complete relief, with recurrence of attack at more or less frequent
intervals. Itis an allergic reaction to pollen, spores, cold, humidity, pollution etc which manifests itself
by spasmodic contraction of small bronchiole tubes. Asthma results in the release of inflammatory
chemicals such as histamines into the circulatory system that cause severe contraction of the
bronchiole.

Emphysema
Emphysema is a break down of alveoli. This respiratory problem is more common among smokers.
The substances presentin the smoke of the tobacco weaken the wall of alveoli. The irritant substances
of smoke generally cause “smoker's cough” and
coughing bursts some of the weakened alveoli. In the
result of constant coughing the absorbing surface of
the lung is greatly reduced. The person suffering from
emphysema cannot oxygenate his blood properly and
least exertion makes him breathless and exhausted.

Emphysema produces increased airway resistance because the bronchioles are obstructed as a
result of inflammation and because damaged bronchioles collapse during expiration, trapping air
within the alveolar sacs.

Role of Respiratory Pigments
Various types of respiratory pigments are present in different animals. The pigment combines with
oxygen reversibly and increase the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. Haemoglobin is the most

(23) V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

important protein present in many animals including man. Haemoglobinin man increases the oxygen
carrying capacity of the blood to about 75 times. You are familiar with its chemical composition.

Myoglobin is haemoglobin-like iron-containipg protein pigment occurring in muscle fibers.
Myoglobin is also known as muscle haemoglobin. It serves as an intermediate compound for the
transfer of oxygen from haemoglobin to aerobic metabolic processes of the muscle cells. It can
also store some oxygen. Myoglobin consists of just one polypeptide chain associated with an iron-
containing ring structure which can bind with one molecule of oxygen. The affinity of myoglobins
to combine with oxygen is much higher as compared to haemoglobin.

Diving reflex
Aquatic mammals especially cetaceans can stay in the depth of the ocean for about two hours
without coming up for air.

Diving mammals have almost twice the volume of blood in relation to their body weight as
compared to non divers. Most of the diving mammals have high concentration of myoglobin in
their muscles. Myoglobin binds extra oxygen.

When a mammal dives to its limit the diving reflex is activated. The breathing stops, the rate of
heart beat slows down to one tenth of the normal rate, theconsumption of oxygen and energy
is reduced. The blood is redistributed but most of the blood goes to the brain and heart which
can least withstand anoxia. Skin muscles and digestive organs and other internal organs receive
very little blood while an animal is submerged because these areas can survive with less oxygen.
Muscles shift from aerobic to anaerobic respiration.

Lung capacities

In an adult human being when the lungs are fully inflated the total inside capacity of lungs is about
5 litres. Normally when we are at rest or asleep the exchange is only about half a litre. The volume
of air taken inside the lungs and expelled during exercise is about 3.5 litres. In other words, there
is a residual volume of 1.5 litres even during exercise which cannot be expelled.

Normally, at rest we inhale and exhale 15-20 times per minute. During exercise the breathing rate
may rise to 30 times per minute. The increased rate and depth of breathing during exercise allows
more oxygen to dissolve in blood and supplied be to the active muscles. The extra carbon dioxide
which the muscle puts into the blood is removed by deep and fast breathing. There is a little change
in the composition of inhaled and exhaled air during rest or exercise in most of the constituents of

the air as seen in the Table 13.1
V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

Table 13.1. Changes in the composition of the breathed air


13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

EXERCISE

Q.1__ ‘Fill in the blanks
(i) is the most abundant protein in the world.

(ii) Haemoglobin is a complex molecule which contains 9512 atoms and amino
acids.

(iii) The opening of larynx is called

(iv) When the smaller bronchi attain the diameter of mm or less they are called
bronchioles

(v) There are about stomata per square centimeter of leaf surface of tobacco
plant

Q.2. Write whether the statement is true or false. Correct the statement if it is false.
(i) ATP is generated during organismic respiration .
(ii) Water is a better respiratory medium than air.
(iii) The earthworm does not possess specialized organs for respiration.
(iv) In parabronchi of birds, the blood flows in the opposite direction of air flow.
(v) Ring shaped cartilages are present in trachea of man.
Q.3. Short questions
(i) How does breathing differ from respiration?
(ii) How much carbon dioxide is present in venous and arterial blood?

(iii) How does air always remain in the lungs of human beings?

(iv) What are the products which are produced during photorespiration?

V: 1.1

13. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab

(v)

How much denser is a water medium than air medium for exchange of respiratory
gases?

Q.4 Extensive questions

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)

In what ways is air a better respiratory medium than water?

What is photorespiration? Give its consequences.

Describe briefly the properties of respiratory surfaces in cockroach.

In what ways is respiration in birds the most efficient and elaborate?

Discuss the mechanical aspects of breathing in man.

Write a detailed note on respiratory pigments.

List the air passage way in sequence from nostrils to alveoli. Describe the structure
of alveolus in detail.

CHAPTER

14

Transport

Animation 14.1:T ransport in Plant
ource & Credit:

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

INTRODUCTION

In this chapter our main focus would be to study different processes involved in the transport of
nutrients into the cells and removal of the wastes out of the cells. We would also study, essentially
in plants and animals, the elaborate mechanism involved not only for the movement of individual
molecules but also their mass transport within bodies. The processes involved for getting materials
into and out of the cells are diffusion, facilitated diffusion, osmosis, active transport, endocytosis,
exocytosis etc.

In animals, the materials move into, within and out of the body, in respiratory circulatory, digestive
and excretory systems. In plants the processes of respiration, transportation, photosynthesis,
absorption by roots, conduction of water, and the nutrients are involved in movement of the
materials into, within and out of the body.

NEED FOR TRANSPORT OF MATERIALS

The living organism is a complex of interactions of physical and chemical reactions involving
different elements and molecules. All living cells or living organisms, must obtain and transport
certain materials within the body and also transport and remove the wastes out of their bodies or
cells.

If there were no transport systems, most of the cells of the body of acomplex multicellular organism,
would not be able to get the required materials and dispose of their wastes. There are no mass
flow systems in unicellular organisms and lower multicellular organisms.

TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

Uptake and Transport of Minerals and Water

The roots of a plant not only anchor the plant body in the soil,
but also absorb minerals and water from the soil. There are
three types of nutrients needed by the plants, carbon dioxide,

water and
(2) V: 1.1


14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

minerals besides light to carry out photosynthesis. To get these materials, roots must provide large
surface area for absorption, which is achieved by extensive branching. The roots bear a dense
cluster of tiny hair like structures which are extensions of epidermal cells of roots.

These are the root hairs, which are in fact the sites where most
of the uptake of water and minerals takes place.

Plants are able to sythesize all their required compounds,
with the help of the minerals and H,0 from soil, CO, from air,
and light energy. Most of the minerals enter the root hairs
or epidermal cells of roots along with water in bulk flow, but
some are taken in by diffusion, facilitated diffusion, or active
transport.

Mineral absorption by roots

The minerals available to plants for absorption are dissolved
in the soil water. Their concentration vary according to the
fertility and the acidity of the soil, besides other factors. When
the soil minerals are not in solution but are bound by ionic
bonds to soil particles, they are not available to plants.

Processes involved in absorption by roots

The uptake of minerals by root cells is a combination of
passive uptake and active uptake, involving the use of energy
in the form of ATP. The passive uptake involves diffusion. The
minerals they also move down their concentration gradient
through plasmodesmata (symplast pathway) to cells of cortex,
endodermis, pericycle and then to sap in xylem cells. From
here they are pulled up by transpiration pull to different parts
of plant.

The diffusion of ions along with water also takes place by

mass flow along the apoplast pathway. lons moving in the apoplast can only reach the endodermis,
where casparian strips prevent further progress (Fig. 14.1). To cross the endodermis, ions must
pass by diffusion or active transport into endodermis cells, entering their cytoplasm, and possibly
their vacuoles. The ions then reach the xylem cells. Diffusion of ions can also take the vacuolar
pathway where the ions move along their concentration gradient through the cell membranes,
cytoplasm, and tonoplast (the membrane of vacuoles), and reach the dead xylem cells.

G) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Most of ions are taken up by the roots by the process of active transport. By this method plants
can take a mineral that is in higher concentration inside the root cells than in the soil solution. In
this process molecules and ions move from their low concentration to their higher concentration
(i.e. against the concentration gradient), through cell membrane, by the use of energy in the form
of ATP. Active transport is selective and is dependent on respiration. Some ions move by passive as
well as by active transport.

Soil water Ajir Epidermis Cortex Endodermis Vascular cylinder

Root hair Plasmodesmata Casparianstrip Pericycle

Fig.14.1 Mineral and water uptake by roots. The Casparian strip separates the extracellular space in the root into two compartments:
an outer compartment that is continuous with the soil water, and an inner compartment that is continuous with the inside of the
conducting cells of the xylem. The black lines show a pathway for both water and mineral; the blue line is an alternative pathway for
water alone.

Animation 1 4.2: transpul
Source and Credit: msseconisseniorbiology

(4) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Symbiotic Relationship Mycorrhizae help in uptake of minerals
helps plants acquire
nutrients. The fungal associations with roots of higher plants, help

mineral uptake by the plant.
One of the important

nutrient N, is almost always The fungi facilitate the uptake of phosphorus and trace
in short supply both in rock metals such as zinc and copper.

particles andinthe soil water.

Most plants have evolved A root infected with mycorrhizal fungi can transport
beneficial relationship with phosphate at a higher rate than that of an uninfected root.
other organisms that help

the plants acquire these Mycorrhizal fungi get sugar, and shelter from the plant and
Scarce nutrients. Examples in exchange increase the plant's mineral nutrient uptake
include: Mycorrhize and efficiency. Mycorrhizae are present in 90% families of
nitrogen fixing bacteria in flowering plants.

root nodules of legumes.

Some nutrients are carried from the soil to the epidermal cells of roots through their cell membrane
by facilitated diffusion. In this type of diffusion, carrier molecules within the cell membrane
transport nutrients across the membrane. These carrier molecules are proteins - which are present
within cell membrane of epidermal and other root cells.

Uptake of Water by Roots

Normally, the movement of water molecules from a region of their higher concentration to a region
of their low concentration through a partially permeable membrane is called osmosis. If water
moves by osmosis into a cell the process is called endosmosis, and if the water moves out of the
cell it is called exosmosis.

The cell wall of epidermal cells of roots is freely permeable to water and other minerals. The cell
membrane, however, is differentially or partially permeable to some substances in the solution.
The water which enters the epidermal cells moves along the concentration gradient and passes
through cortex, endodermis, pericycle and ultimately to xylem cells. (Fig. 14.2)

G) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Piliferous layer or

Epidermis Endodermis
i) fs Cortex <j f

= ys Pericycle

i/

Cell wall
Cytoplasm
Vacuole

Airt+water

pi
Root hair / Xylem vessels

\ meee Apolast pathway

(interrupted af endodernis)

Thin film of water
tightly bound to
clay particle meee Symplast pathway

——  Vacuolar pathway

Fig. 14.2 Diagrammatic representation of water and ion movement across a root showing transverse section. The apoplast pathway
is of greatest importance for both water and solutes. The symplast pathway is less important, except for salts in the region of the
endodermis. Movement along the vacuolar pathway is negligible.

Following are the paths taken by water to reach the xylem tissue:

(1) The apoplast pathway

It is the pathway involving system of adjacent cell walls which is continuous throughout the plant
roots. In the roots apoplast pathway becomes discontinuous in the endodermis due to the presence
of casparian strips.

(11) The Symplast pathway

It is the system of interconnected protoplasts in the root cells. The cytoplasm of neighbouring cells
(Protoplasts) is connected with one another by Plasmodesmata which are cytoplasmic strands that
extend through pores in adjacent cell walls. In the cells of root the cell membrane and cytoplasm
(and plasmodesmata) can be regarded as acting together as one partially permeable membrane.

(111) The vacuolar pathway

In this pathway water moves from vacuole to vacuole through neighbouring cells crossing the
symplast and apoplast in the process and moving through cell membranes by osmosis. Water
moves passively down a concentration gradient.

(6) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Water Potential (Symbolized By Greek Letter Psi = \w )

Water molecules possess kinetic energy which means that in liquid or gaseous form, they move
about rapidly and randomly from one place to another. So, greater the concentration of the water
molecules in a system the greater is the total kinetic energy of water molecules. This is called water

potential (Ww).

In plant cells two factors determine water potential.
i) Solute concentration (Osmotic or solute potential = Ws)
li) Pressure generated when water enters and inflates plant cells (Pressure potential = Wp).

Pure water has maximum water potential which by definition is zero.

Water moves from a region of higher Ww to lower Yw.
All solutions have lower Ww than pure water and so have negative value of Ww (at atmospheric
pressure and at a defined temperature). So osmosis can be defined as:

“The movement of water molecules from a region of higher water potential to a region of lower
water potential through a partially permeable membrane”.

Osmotic (Solute) Potential = Ws
The osmotic (solute) potential Ws is a measure of the change in water potential(\Ws) of a system
due to the presence of solute molecules. Ws is always negative. More solute molecules present,
lower (more negative) is the Ws.

Pressure Potential (\/p)

If pressure greater than atmospheric pressure is applied to pure water or a solution, its water
potential increases. It is equivalent to pumping water from one place to another. Such a situation
may arise in living systems.

When water enters plant cells by osmosis pressure may be built up inside the cell making the cell
turgid and increasing the pressure potential. Thus the total water potential is sum of Ws and Wp.

Ww ~ Ys * WP

water potential solute potential pressure potential

7) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

If we use the term water potential, the tendency for water to move between any two systems can
be measured; not just from cell to cell in a plant but also from soil to root from leaf to air or from
soil to air. The steeper the potential gradient the faster is the flow of water along it.

The following example would help understand the concept of water potential. Two adjacent
vacuolated cells are shown with Ww, Wp and Ws.

Freely permeable cell walls.

CELLB Partially permeable

_-~ cell surface memberanes
ys, =-800kPa

yw, =600kPa

ye = 1 400kPa

Fig. 14.3 Two adjacent vacuolated cells.

Q. a) Which cell has the higher water potential?
b) In which direction will water move by osmosis?
c) What will be the water potential of the cells at equilibrium?
d) What will be the solute potential and pressure potential of the cells at
equilibrium?

Plasmolysis and Pressure Potential

Plasmolysis can be defined as the shrinkage of protoplast due to exosmosis of water. When a living
cell is placed in a solution having lower water potential than that of the cell, plasmolysis takes place
and the cell is called plasmolysed. If this plasmolysed cell is placed in distilled water (which has
highest water potential) the water molecules would move from distilled water through differentially
permeable cell membrane into the cell, and the cell would become deplasmolysed.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

The point at which plasmolysis is just about to happen is called incipient plasmolysis. At incipient
plasmolysis the protoplast has just ceased to exert any pressure against the cell wall, so the cell is
flaccid.

If a plasmolysed cell is placed in distilled water, the one having higher water potential than the
contents of the cell, water enters the cell by endosmosis, volume of protoplast increases, and it
begins to exert pressure against the cell wall of plant cell. The cell wall is rigid - so the pressure exerted
by the protoplast against the cell wall is called pressure potential. As the pressure potential of the
cell increases due to endosmosis, the cell becomes turgid. Full turgidity i.e. maximum pressure
potential is achieved when a cell is placed in pure water or distilled water.

The animal cells cannotwithstand higher pressure potential as there is no cell wall around protoplast.
Thus the turgid cells burst in a solution of higher water potential. So the animals employ the
mechanism of osmoregulation to maintain the amount of water and salts in their cells to constant
or nearly constant levels.

ASCENT OF SAP

In the previous pages you have learned that water and dissolved minerals traverse the cortex
and endodermis and reach the xylem tissue of roots. (Fig. 14.1,14.2) Actually, water and dissolved
minerals are carried or pulled upwards towards the leaves through xylem tissue. This is called
ascent of sap. This may involve the following :

(A) Cohesion Tension Theory (B) Root Pressure (C) Imbibition

(A) Cohesion tension theory is one of the most important theories proposed by Dixon. This
theory provides a reasonable explanation of flow of water and minerals upwards from the roots
to leaves of plants, in bulk flow or mass flow (Fig. 14.5). This depends on the following:

(i) Cohesion: It is the attraction among water molecules which hold water together, forming a solid
chain-like column within the xylem tubes. The water molecules form hydrogen bonds between

them.

(ii) Tension: It is provided when this water chain is pulled up in the xylem (Fig. 14.4). Transpiration

(@) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

provides the necessary energy or force. Tension is between the molecules of water by hydrogen
bonds.

This xylem water tension is strong enough to pull water up to 200 metres (more than 600 feet) in
plants.

(iii) Adhesion: It may be added that the water molecules also adhere to the cell walls of xylem cells,
so that the column of water in xylem tissue does not break. The composition of cell wall provides
necessary adhesion to water molecules that helps water creep up. The cellulose component of cell
wall especially has great affinity for water. It can imbibe water.

Mylam Pits

Tracheld

(b)

Vessel elements.

Fig.14.4 (a) Xylem Tissue elements involved in transportation of water and dissolved minerals, (b) Scanning electron micrograph of
two large vessel elements of a cucumber root.

(iv) Strong xylem walls: It is essential that the xylem walls should have high tensile strength if they
are not to buckle inwards. The lignin and cellulose provides strength to cell wall of xylem vessels
(Fig. 14.4).

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

By cohesion-tension of water molecules, and the transpiration pull providing the necessary energy,
the sap (water and minerals) in xylem tissue is pulled upwards to the leaves. Large quantities of
water are carried at relatively high speed, upto 8mh" being recorded in tall trees, and commonly
in other plants at 1mh".

The total water pulled up in the leaves is transpired, except about 1% which is used by plant in
various activities including photosynthesis.

Mechanism of transpiration pull in cohesion tension theory

The evaporation of water from the aerial parts of the plant especially through stomata of leaves
is a process called transpiration. As a leaf transpires the water potential of its mesophyll cells
drops. This drop, causes water to move by osmosis from the xylem cells of leaf into dehydrating
mesophyll cells. The water molecules leaving the xylem are attached to other water molecules
in the same xylem tube by hydrogen bonds (cohesion of water molecules). Therefore, when one
water molecule moves up the xylem, the process continues all the way to the root - where water
is pulled from the xylem cells (tracheids and vessels). This pull also causes water to move down its
concentration gradient transversely from the root epidermis (root hairs) to cortex by endosmosis
and to pericycle. This pulling force or transpiration pull is so strong that it also reduces the water
potential of root epidermal cells. Then water in the soil moves from its higher water potential to
lower water potential of epidermis of root by osmosis.

(11) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Evaporation
from level

Cohesion of water
molecule to one another
and to xylem wall, by

hydrogen bonds

Water enters
vascular cylinder

Fig.14.5 The cohesion-tension theory of water flow from root to leaf.

(12) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

(B) Root pressure : Second force involved in the movement of water and dissolved minerals up
in the xylem tissue is the root pressure. Root pressure is created by the active secretion of salts and
other solutes from the other cells into the xylem sap. This lowers the water potential of xylem sap.
Water enters the xylem cells by osmosis, thus increasing the level of sap in the xylem cells. Water

entering the xylem cells, may take apoplast, symplast or vacuolar pathway increasing the hydrostatic
pressure in cells, this pushes the water upwards. As a result of root pressure the sap in the xylem
does not rise to enough height in most plants. The root pressure is also least effective during the
day, when transpiration pull is the active force involved in pulling the sap in xylem cells upwards.
It has been estimated that a positive hydrostatic pressure of around 100 to 200 KPa (exceptionally
800 KPa) is generated by root pressure. The pressure mentioned above is not enough to push
water upwards to required height in most plants. But it is no doubt a contributing factor in plants
which transpire slowly, and are smaller in size.

Closely associated with root pressure
is a phenomenon called guttation or
exudation. Guttation is loss of liquid
water through water secreting glands
or hydathodes. The dew drops that can
be seen on the tips of grass leaves or
strawberry leaves are actually guttation
droplets exuded from hydathodes. (Fig.
14.6).

Guttation or exudation is more notable
when transpiration is suppressed, and
the relative humidity is high as at night.
The guttation is in fact due to positive
pressure - the root pressure, developed
in xylem tissue of roots.

Fig. 14.6 Guttation by stawberry leaves

(C) Imbibition : Another important force in the ascent of sap is imbibition. Sacks in 1874 sugested
that the water molecules move along the cell walls of xylem vessels due to imbibition.

The cell wall components especially cellulose, pectin and lignin can take up water and as a result

Us) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

increase in volume, but the components do not dissolve in water, this is called imbibition. The
amount of attraction and increase of dry cell walls of plant cells, and of protoplasm for water is
often very great and considerable imbibition forces may be developed in plant body. The root cell
walls imbibe water from the soil, and this water moves by apoplast pathway already discussed.

Imbibition is a reversible process and when water is lost the original volume of cell wall and of
protoplasm is restored. The uptake of water by imbibition is especially important in germinating
seeds. The volume of dry seed may increase up to 200 times by imbibition, as a result, the seed
coat ruptures and makes the germination of seed effective.

Bleeding : Sometimes it so happens that certain plants, when cut, pruned, tapped or otherwise
wounded, show a flow of sap from the cut ends or surfaces quite often with a considerable force.
This phenomenon is commonly called bleeding.

It is often seen in many land plants in the spring, particularly grape wine, some palms, sugar maple
etc.

Although the flow of sap is ordinarily slow, a considerable quantity of the sap within a period of 24
hours comes out of the plant. In some palms when tapped, there may be a flow of sap to the extent
of 10-15 litres per day. The sap in such plants contains sugars and water in addition to organic and
inorganic substances (e.g. Salts).

There are two main factors responsible for bleeding, the hydrostatic pressure in xylem and phloem
elements, and the root pressure, which is exerted by the xylem tissues of roots.

TYPES OF TRANSPIRATION

You have already studied the role of transpiration, in ascent of sap.
There are three types of transpiration depending upon the route of escape of water vapours from
the aerial parts of the plant.

(i) Cuticular transpiration (ii) Lenticular transpiration (iii) Stomatal transpiration

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Animation 14.4: Transpiration
Source and Credit: atmos.uiuc

(i) Cuticular transpiration : The loss of water in the form of water vapours through the cuticle
of leaves is called cuticular transpiration. About 5-7% of total transpiration takes place through this
route.

The cuticle present on the upper and lower epidermis of leaves is not completely impermeable
to water and some water is lost in the form of vapours through cuticle. The thinner the cuticle
the greater is the rate of transpiration; although the composition of cuticle is also important. At
night, when the stomata are almost closed, cuticular transpiration takes place. Most of the factors
which affect rate of transpiration, in general, are also important in controlling the rate of cuticular
transpiration.

(ii) Lenticular transpiration : Lenticular transpiration is the loss of water vapours through
lenticels present in the stem of some plants. (Fig. 14.7) All plants do not possess lenticels.

(15) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

The lenticular transpiration is 1-2% of the total transpiration by a plant. These openings, like
stomata,are also involved in the exchange of gases between environment. When there is strong
light and high temperature,the loss of vapours is rapid because it is governed by diffusion.

Lenticels are aerating pores formed in the bark through which exchange of gases takes place, and
water is lost in the form of water vapours (transpiration). Externally, they appear as scars or small
protrusions on the surface of stem. Lenticel consists of a loose mass of small, thin-walled cells.
At each lenticel the cork cambium forms oval, spherical, or irregular cells, which are very loosely
arranged, having lots of intercellular spaces.

Fig. 14.7 Left : The waterproof outer bark (layer of dark cells on the surface) on this section of stem is interrupted at the center of
the lenticel. Thus the more loosely arranged cell layer beneath, with their numerous intercellular air spaces, are exposed to the
atmosphere, Right: The individual lenticels can be seen as white areas on the surface of a young stem.

(iii) Stomatal transpiration : It is a type of transpiration in which the water vapours escape
through stomata. In isobilateral leaves the stomata are present, in both, upper and lower epidermis
e.g. lily and maize leaf. In dorsiventral leaves the stomata are confined to only the lower epidermis.

The guard cells are normally dumble or bean-seed-shaped. The inner concave sides of two guard
cells enclose the stoma. This inner side of guard cell has very thick cell wall, but the outer convex

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

side has thin cell wall. The guard cells are the only cells, of leaf epidermis, which are not connected
by plasmodesmata to other epidermal cells, and which have chloroplasts - and thus are involved
in the process of photosynthesis (Fig. 14.8). When these guard cells are turgid, the stoma between
them opens and when the guard cells are flaccid the stoma between them closes. The degree of
opening of stomatal pores also affects the rate of transpiration. 90% of total transpiration in a plant
is stomatal.

The cells of mesophyll of leaf provide enormous surface ‘area for the loss of water in the form of
vapours. The pathway of water vapours loss to the atmosphere, through stomata is shown. (Fig.
14.8)

Movment Xylem = Intercelular

between cells vessel space Eepemiion j/penepicennia

Mesophyll

Lower epidermis \ Stoma

Fig.14.8 The water pathway through the leaf. Water is drawn from the xylem into the cell walls of the mesophyll, where it evaporates
into the air spaces within the leaf. By diffusion, water vapour then moves through the leaf air space, through the stomatal pore, and
across the boundary layer of still air that adheres to the outer leaf surface. CO, also diffuses into the leaf through stomata along a
concentration gradient.

OPENING AND CLOSING OF STOMATA

The guard cells function as multisensory hydraulic valves (Fig. 14.9). Environmental factors, such as
light intensity and quality, temperature, relative humidity, and intracellular CO, concentration are

(17) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab
sensed by guard cells and these signals are integrated into well-defined stomatal responses.

There are two hypotheses which may explain the opening and closing of stomata.

i) Starch Sugar Hypothesis : The German botanist H. Van Mohl proposed that the guard cells
are the only photosynthesising cells of epidermis of leaf and sugars are produced in them during
day time when light is available. When sugar level rises i.e. solute concentration increases or water
potential decreases - and the guard cells become turgid due to entry of water and they separate
from one another, and stoma or pore opnes. During night there is no photosynthesis the sugars
are either converted into insoluble starch or are used in respiration, this decreases free sugars
in cell. So the osmotic pressure of guard cells is lowered, and water leaves the guard cells, which
become flaccid and stoma or pore between them closes. But these processes are not fast enough
to account for the rapid rise in turgor, of guard cells.

ii) Influx of K* ions : Potassium concentration in guard cells increases several fold, depending
upon plant species.

Stomata open due to active transport of potassium ions (K*) into the guard cells from the surrounding
epidermis. The accumulation of K* decreases the osmotic potential of guard cells. Water enters
the guard cells by osmosis, which become more turgid and stretched and stomata are opened.
The stoma closes by reverse process; involving passive diffusion of K* from guard cells followed
by water moving out by osmosis. What controls the movement of K* into and out of guard cells?
Level of carbon dioxide in the spaces inside the leaf and light, control this movement. A low level
of carbon dioxide favours opening of the stomata, thus allowing an increased carbon dioxide level
and increased rate of photosynthesis.

Exposure to blue light, which is also effective in photosynthesis has been shown to acidify the
environment of the guard cells (i.e. pumps Out protons) which enable the guard cells to take up K*
followed by water uptake resulting in increased turgidity of guard cells. So in general stoma are
open during day and closed at night. This prevents needless loss of water by the plant when it is
too dark for photosynthesis.

The plants open their stomata by actively pumping Potassium in guard cells causing water to follow
by osmosis. Guard cells become turgid and stoma or pore opens. When Potassium leaves the
guard cells (during night) water leaves the guard cells by exosmosis and guard cells become flaccid
and stoma or pore between guard cells closes.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

*
\ (b) Gtard Cell

ai

- |

|

”

(a) Guard Cell

Fig 14.9 Stomata . Stomata seen through (a) the light microscope and (b) scanning electron microscope. In the light micrograph, note
that the guard cells contain chloroplasts (the green ovals within the cells) but that the other epidermal cells do not.

Animation 14.5: Stomata
Source and Credit: gifsoup

Factors affecting the rate of transpiration

Rate of transpiration for a plant is very important as the transpiration stream is necessary to

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

distribute dissolved mineral salts throughout the plant. Water is transported to photosynthesizing
cells of leaves. Transpiration is also very important as it cools the plant. This is especially important
in higher temperatures. If the rate of transpiration is very high, there would be much loss of water
from the plant, so at high temperatures the stomata almost close and reduction in the rate of
transpiration is effected. This stops wilting of the leaves and of plants (herbaceous plants).

There are some important factors which affect the rate of transpiration in a plant.

(i) Light (ii) Temperature
(ili) CO2 concentration (iv) Humidity and vapour pressure
(v) Wind and (vi) Availability of soil water.

i) Light : The opening and closing of stomata is directly controlled by the light. In strong light the
rate of transpiration is much more as compared with that in dim light or no light. As Potassium
actively enters the guard cells, when light is available, water follows - and guard cells become turgid,
and stoma opens.

ii) Temperature: When the sun-light is strong on a bright and sunny day the environmental
temperature is increased. The higher temperature reduces the humidity of the surrounding air.
The evaporation of water from the surfaces of mesophyll cells also increases, thus increasing the
rate of transpiration.

The rate of transpiration doubles by every rise of 10°C in temperature. Very high environmental
temperature, i.e. 40-45°C cause closure of stomata, so that plant does not loose much needed water.
If higher temperatures are maintained in the environment
for a longer duration and soil water is limited, the plants
would wilt and may die.

iii) Carbon dioxide concentration : Low carbon
dioxide concentration (such as those that occurs during the
day when photosynthesis exceeds respiration), stimulates
the active transport of Potassium ions into the guard cells. This transport (as discussed earlier)
causes stomata to open and allow CO, to diffuse in the mesophyll cells of leaves. At night cellular
respiration in the absence of photosynthesis raises CO, levels. This halts the inward transport of kK’,
and thus of water, allowing the guard cells to become flaccid and stomata close. Thus transpiration

almost stops.
V: 1.1


14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

iv) Humidity and vapour pressure : When air is dry, the rate of diffusion of water molecules,
from the surfaces of mesophyll cells, air spaces, and through stomata to outside the leaf, increases
(Fig. 14.8). So more water is lost, increasing the rate of transpiration. In humid air the diffusion rate
is reduced. This decreases the rate of transpiration appreciably.

v) Wind : The air in motion is called wind, which causes increase in rate of diffusion of water
molecules. The rate of evaporation from the surfaces of mesophyll cells increases. When air is still,
the rate of movement of water molecules (diffusion) is slowed down, thus reducing the rate of
transpiration.

vi) Availability of soil water : If there is little water in the soil, less is brought or transported
to the leaf cells and less is lost to the environment by transpiration. So when the rate of absorption
of water in root cells is reduced, the rate of transpiration is reduced.

Transpiration as a necessary evil

Transpiration has been described as necessary evil because it is an inevitable, but potentially
harmful consequence of the existence of wet cell surfaces from which evaporation occurs. Loss of
water from the plant can lead to wilting, serious desiccation and often death of a plant if conditions
of drought are experienced. There is good evidence that even mild water stress results in reduced
growth rate and in crops to economic losses through reduction of yield.

Despite its apparent inevitability it is also of very great importance for the plant.

i) Water is conducted or transported in most tall plants with the courtesy of transportation pull.
ii) Minerals dissolved in water are distributed throughout plant body by transpiration stream.
iii) Evaporation of water from the exposed surface of cells of leaves has cooling effect on plant.
iv) Wet surface of leaf cells allow gaseous exchange.

TRANSLOCATION OF ORGANIC SOLUTES

Organic solutes are transported by phloem tissue.

Phloem Transport
The phloem is generally found on the outer side of both primary and secondary vascular tissue in
plants with secondary growth. The phloem constitute the inner bark. The cells of phloem thatconduct

(21) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab
or transport sugars and other organic material throughout the plant are called sieve elements.

In addition to sieve elements, phloem tissue also contains companion cells, parenchyma cells, and
in some cases fibres, sclereids and latex containing cells. However, only sieve tube cells are directly
involved in transport of organic solutes.

Sieve elements are characterised by ‘sieve areas’ portions of the cell wall where pores interconnect
the conducting cells. Some of the sieve areas of sieve tube members are generally formed in end
walls of sieve tube members where the individual cells are joined together to form a longitudinal
series called a sieve tube. Sieve plate pores of sieve tubes are essentially open channels, that allow
transport between cells (Fig. 14.10).

(th)

Fig. 14.10 (a) This diagram shows part of the root phloem consisting of sieve tube members stacked end to end. Adjoining end walls
have common pores. Each sieve tube member is associated with a companion cell (b) Sieve tube member showing the pores in its end
walls. Note the scarcity of cytoplasmic components in these sugar conducting cells.

Each sieve tube member is associated with one or more companion cells. Sieve tubes and companion
cells are in communication with each other by plasmodesmata. Companion cells supply ATP and
proteins to sieve tubes. The photosynthetic products from photosynthesizing cells, the mesophyll
and palisade layer of leaf, pass into sieve tubes, through the companion cell via plasmodesmata.

Patterns of Transport

Phloem transport does not occur exclusively in an upward or a downward direction and is not

defined with respect of gravity. Transport or translocation occurs from the areas of supply (Sources)

to areas of metabolism or storage (sinks). (22)
V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

The areas of sources include any exporting organ typically a mature leaf, or storage organ, that is
capable of

i) Storing photosynthate in excess of its own needs.

li) Storage organ during the exporting phase of its development. In biennials e.g root of beet is a
sink in first growing season, but becomes source in the The composition of materials flowing in phloem has

next growing season, when sugars are utilized in growth been studied by using aphids - the insects which are

of new shoots. phloem feeders (Fig 14.11). These insects insert their

beey Ge . . stylets into stem or leaf and extend them to puncture
li) Sinks are the areas of active metabolism or storage 9g sieve tube. The pressure in the sieve tube cell forces

for example roots, tubers, developing fruits, immature sap through aphid's digestive tract and out its posterior

leaves. and even the growing tips of stem and root end as droplets called “honey dew”. The composition of
’ & & Up . honey dew have revealed that it contains 10-25% dry

matter 90% or more of which is sucrose. Nitrogenous
The movement in phloem is from source to sinks in most C™Pounds are about 1%.

of the plants during active photosynthesis.

Animation 14.6 Absorptive Root |
Source & Credit:

(23) V: 1.1

as a

Fig.14.11 Collection of phloem sap using aphids

The Mechanism of phloem translocation/transport

The theory called, Pressure - Flow Theory, is the most acceptable theory for the transport in the
phloem of angiosperms. We have considerable evidence to support this theory. There were two
main categories of theories to account for movement of sap in phloem. The active theories involving
the use of energy for the movement of materials in phloem, and the passive theories in which no
use of energy was involved. The active theories have all been abandoned as there is not much
evidence to support these theories.

Now we are left with passive theories of transport / translocation. These include:

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Diffusion Pressure flow theory

is far too slow, to account for the velocities of sugar movement in phloem, which
on the average is 1 metre per hour, while the rate of diffusion is 1 metre per eight years. So we are
left with pressure flow theory.

CO:

Cell wall apoplast

Plasma membrane

Plasmodesmata

Sieve element
Companion cell

Phloem parenchyma cell

Mesophyll cells
getting CO2 for
photosynthesis.

Bundle sheath cell

Fig.14.12 Movement of sugars from mesophyll cells to sieve elements.

A hypothesis was first proposed by Ernst Munch in 1930. It states
that the flow of solution in the sieve elements is driven by anosmotically generated pressure
gradient between’”source and sink. Now this hypothesis has been given status of a theory. See Fig.
14.13, the following steps,explain pressure flow theory.

(1) The glucose formed in the photosynthesizing cells, is used within the cells (for respiration
etc.) and the rest is converted into non-reducing sugar i.e. sucrose. (2) This sucrose is actively
transported through the bundle sheath cells to the companion cell of the smallest vein in leaf, a

(25) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

short distance transport (involving 2 - 3 cells). Thus sucrose diffuses through plasmodesmata to
sieve tube cell or sieve element, raising the concentration of sucrose in it. (Fig. 14.12) The pathway
taken by sucrose is symplast in most cases; but is some, apoplastic movement does take place.
The sucrose is actively transported to the sieve elements. (3) The water moves by osmosis from the
nearby xylem in the leaf vein. This increases the hydrostatic pressure of the sieve tube element.

(4) Hydrostatic pressure moves the sucrose and other substances in the sieve tube cells, and moves
to sinks e.g. fruits and roots. In the storage sinks, such as sugar beet root and sugarcane stem,
sucrose is removed into apoplast prior to entering symplast of the sink.

(5) Water moves out of sieve tube cell by osmosis, lowering the hydrostatic pressure.

In symplastic pathway, sucrose (or sugars) move through plasmodesmata to the receiver cell. Thus
according to pressure flow theory, the pressure gradient is established as a consequence of entry
of sugars in the sieve elements at the source; and removal of sugars (Sucrose) at the sink (Fig.
14.13). The energy driven entry of sugars in sieve tube elements, generate high osmotic pressure
in the sieve tube elements of the source causing a steep drop in the water potential.

(6) The presence of sieve plates greatly increases the resistance along the pathway and results in
the generation and maintenance of a substantial pressure gradient in the sieve elements between
source and sink.

The sieve element's contents are physically pushed along the transportation pathway by bulk flow,
much like water flowing through a garden hose.

The pressure flow theory accounts for the mass flow of molecules within phloem. It may be noted
that the transpertation of photosynthate or carbohydrates from the mesophyll cells to phloem
tissue involves diffusion and active transport (carrier mediated transport). Then in phloem tissue
(sieve tubes) the movement of materials is according to pressure flow theory.

Again in the sink cells when the sugar and the carbohydrates are passed from the phloem tissue,
diffusion and carrier mediated transport, either passive or active, takes place, (See table 14.1).

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

(Source of Sucrose)
Plasmodesmata

Fruit (sink for sucrose)

Companion call

Water © ———} Osmosis
Sucrose § > Active transport of sucrose

Fig. 14.13 The Pressure-flow theory (1) A photosynthesizing leaf manufactures sucrose (red dots), which (2) is actively transported (red
arrow) into a nearby companion cell. The sucrose diffuses to sieve-tube element through plasmodesmata, raising the concentration
of sucrose. (3) Water (blue dots leaves nearby xylem and moves into the “leaf end” of the sieve tube by osmosis (blue arrow), raising
the hydrostatic pressure. (4) The same sieve tube connects to a developing fruit (sink); sucrose enters the companion cells by diffusion
through plasmodesmata. It is then actively transported out of the companion cells and into the fruit cells. (5) Water moves out of
the sieve tube by osmosis, lowering the hydrostatic pressure within the tube. (6) High pressure in the leaf end of the phloem and low
pressure in the fruit end cause water, together with any dissolved solutes, to flow in bulk from leaf (source) to fruit. (Black arrow).

(27) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS

Unicellular animals have maximum surface area to volume ratio; and most of the substances move
into or out of their bodies by simple diffusion, osmosis, active transport, and facilitated diffusion.
So there are no special transport systems involved. Same is true of simple multicellular animals
which are aquatic. But complex multicellular animals possess highly organized, and well developed
transport system, in the form of blood vascular system.

Transportation in Hydra

It is fresh water in habitat. The body is two layered;
the outer ectoderm and inner endoderm; in between
them is mesogloea which is non-cellular. The outer
surfaces of the ectoderm cells are exposed to the
water in which the animal lives. Water, dissolved 0,,
and food is taken into the coelenteron(enteron) of
Hydra by the movement of tentacles, and flagella
which are present in most cells of endoderm.

Tentacle

The materials and food may be absorbed or taken
up by endocytosis into endodermal cells. The Mouth
indigestible and partly digested food is removed

eh Duplo

by exocytosis from these cells, into digestive cavity
(coelenteron). Ectodermal cells get food from
endodermal cells by diffusion. Gastro vasculal
cavity
eh

The ectodermal cells directly exchange materials i (Enetron)
with the surrounding water (Fig 14.14). They also
get nutrients from endodermal cells. Water Water

Basal disc

Fig.14.14 Hydra

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Transportation in Planaria
The body of Planaria is flat, so the most of its cells are exposed to the outer water. Diffusion is the
process involved in the movement of materials into and out of the cells.

There is no special transport system in Planaria. The reasons are:

(i) The body of Planaria is flat, and provides greater surface area for the exchange of materials,
between the body and the environment.

(ii) Planaria is acoelomate i.e. there is no body cavity and the mesodermal layer or mesenchyme is
composed of loosely packed cells between ectoderm and endoderm. Whatever materials, such
as 0,, diffuse in the ectoderm, pass to mesoderm cells and then diffuse into endoderm cells.
For the removal of wastes the same route is reversed. Intestinal caecae reach near almost every
cell of the body and digested food is provided to the cells by diffusion. The endoderm cells, can
also acquire food, water, dissolved minerals, and to some extent 0,. and remove wastes into the
gut.

CIRCULATORY SYSTEM

In the body of larger and complex animals, there is very little exposed surface area to volume ratio.
Most of the cells are not exposed to the external environment directly and it becomes very difficult
to transport materials by simpl diffusion. Complex animals have evolved transport systems in the
form of blood vascular system or circulatory system.

Characteristics of Circulatory System
A circulatory system accounts for rapid mass flow of materials from one part of the body to the
other, where diffusion would be too slow.

There are three characteristics of a circulatory system.

(A) A circulatory fluid - the blood.

(B) A contractile pumping device - which may be the modified blood vessel or a heart.

(C) Tubes, which can transport the circulatory fluid (blood) to and from cells of the body These
tubes are the blood vessels. Materials must be exchanged between the circulatory fluid and

other body cells.
V: 1.1

Open and Closed Circulatory System

The circulatory systems of animals are divided into two main types:

a) Open circulatory system: Itis observed in animals belonging to Phylum Arthropoda (crustaceans,
spiders, insects) and Phylum Mollusca (snails and clams) and group of protochordates, the tunicates.

b) closed circulatory system: Itis observed in animals belonging to annelids,cephalopod molluscs
(squids and octopus), echinoderms and vertebrates.

The differences between open circulatory system and closed circulatory system would be clear by

studying the comparison between circulartary systems of earth worm and cockroach, (see table
14.1).

Animation 14.7: Circulatory System
Source and Credit: technostrikers

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Table 14.1 Comparison between closed and open circulatory systems.

Closed circulatory system e.g. Open circulatory system e.g.

Earthworm (Pheretima) cockroach (Periplaneta)

1. Blood always remain in the blood vessels, and|1. Blood does not remain enclosed in the blood

does not come in direct contact with other cells |vessels and comes in direct contact with other

of the body. body cells, and bathes them.

2. Inter connected system of arteries, veins, and|2. There are no typical arteries, veins, and

capillaries present. capillaries and for much of the time the blood
called haemolymph flows in the cavities or
sinuses of body cavity (hoemocoel) around the
viscera (perivisceral sinus) and around the nerve
cord (perineural sinus).

3. Exchange of nutrients and waste products|3. Exchange of nutrients and waste products

between the blood and tissues via tissue fluid|between the blood and tissues occurs when

occurs through capillaries. blood directly bathes the tissues.

4. The system also transports gases i.e. oxygen|4. This sytem does not transport gases i.e.

and carbon dioxide. oxygen and carbon dioxide (these gases are
transported by tracheal system).

in blood. Nucleated white blood cells are present. |in which nucleated white blood cells float.

6. This is regarded as the most advanced type,|6. This is regarded as primitive having lesser

having greater efficiency, maintaining the blood | efficiency and does not maintain blood pressure.

pressure and economy of blood volume.

7. |n earthworm there are 4 or 5 pairs of lateral} 7. In cockroach the heart is 13-chambered,

hearts present on the lateral side of oesophagus | tubular vessel present in the pericardial sinus

in 7th to 13th segments. Hearts pump the blood | and placed in mid-dorsal region below terga in

from the dorsal to the ventral blood vessel. abdominal region. On the side of the pericardial
Sinus there are alary muscles helping in the
flow of blood. Each heart chamber has a pair of
lateral openings, the ostia.

8. There are three main longitudinally running |8. The portion of the tubular dorsal vessel

blood vessels, dorsal, ventral and sub-neural, |which extends in the thoracic and head

which are interconnected through capillaries | region is called the “aorta”. It opens

and commissural vessels. anteriorly in the haemocoel of the head by
funnel shaped opening.

(1) V: 1.1


9. The dorsal vessel collects blood from the 14°|9. The flow of blood from heart to, aorta to,
segment backwards. In the first 13 segments|haemocoel in head, to perivisceral sinus,
it becomes distributing channel and sends its|to perineural sinus, to pervisceral sinus, to
blood to hearts and anterior end of the body. | pericardial sinus, and to heart through ostia.
Ventral vessel is the chief distributing vessel with

backward flow.The subneural vessel is collecting

vessel and the flow of blood is backwards. It

communicates with dorsal blood vessel through

commissural vessels.

Commissural
Lateral Hearts Dorsal blood vessel blood vessels

/'
| pe ene TT chs ri

capt heed be J Se ae hy = 4 tee te,
a

/- -

— SGP SY . ie A

— pen _ ote A ‘ic. habs ian
et a EY 0) 7 A ee
Capillary Ventral Subneural
net works blood vessel blood vessel

Fig. 14.15 Closed circulatory system of earthworm

Animation 14.8: Closed circulatory system of earthworm
Source and Credit: waterwereld

Pericardial sinus part Dorsal

Bair diaphragm
Perivisceral sinus ee

“i
Alary muscle

diaphragm

Tergum

P i Nerve mY
Perineural
eee cord Ventral
diaphragm
Septum in leg
(a) Last abdominal chamber (b)

of the heart

Fig.14.16 Open circulatory system of cockroach, (a) The heart with alary muscle and dorsal diaphragm,
(b) T.S of cockroach through thorax showing various sinuses.

Vertebrate blood circulatory system

The components of vertebrate blood vascular system are typical of a circulatory system-blood,
heart, blood vessels (arteries, capillaries and veins). All vertebrates have closed circulatory system
In addition there is lymphatic system which also aids in transportation.

Heart pumps the blood to different parts of the body via aorta and arteries Arteries break into fine
blood vessels, the capillaries. These join to form veins which bring blood back to the heart. The
capillaries are sites where exchange of materials between blood and body tissues takes place.

Evolution of vertebrate heart

The heart of fishes have sinus venosus, an atrium, a ventricle, and bulbus arteriosus or conus
arteriosus. Sinus venosus receives deoxygenated blood from the body,and then blood is passed
to atrium, which on contraction passes it to ventricle. ventricle has thick muscular wall. When
the muscles of ventricle contract, they push the blood via conus arteriosus or bulbous arteriosus

(proximal swollen portion of ventral aorta).
(3) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Thus the heart of fishes works as a single circuit heart. The blood flows in one direction only,
from sinus venosus to atrium then to ventricle
and to ventral aorta via bulbus arteriosus or conus
arteriosus to the gills and then to the body. The
blood returns to the heart in the sinus venosus The
oxygenated blood is supplied from dorsal aorta
through coronary arteries,to the heart and is carried
back by coronary veins from the heart).

In amphibians the heart is three chambered with regard to auricles and ventricles.There are two
auricles and one ventricle. In addition, sinus venosus and truncus arteriosus are also present.
Sinus venosus receives de-oxygenated blood from two superior venacavae (precavals) and one
inferior vena cava (postcaval) from different parts
of the body. This blood passes to the right auricle.
The oxygenated blood from lungs is poured via
pulmonary veins into left auricle. Both auricles
contract simultaneously and blood is passed
into the ventricle. There is a complete mixing
of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in the
ventricle. When ventricle contracts, it pushes
blood via truncus arteriosus, to two carotids, two
systemics, and two pulmocutaneous arches.

(Fig. 14.19b).

Fig. 14.17 Structure of heart of frog

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Pulmonary

Systemic
circulalon

Fig.14.18 A schematic comparison of vertebrate heart and circulation of blood. (A) In modern fish
the blood is pumped to the gills, where it picks up oxygen. The oxygenated blood (red) then passes
without further pumping to the systemic circulation, where it gives up its oxygen before returning
to the heart. (B) In amphibians the blood that has picked up oxygen in the gills and/or lungs returns
to the heart, from which it is pumped into the systemic circulation. Extensive mixing (purple) of
the pulmonary and systemic flows occurs in the heart. (C) In reptiles the pattern is much the same,
except that the ventricles are partially divided, so less mixing takes place. (D) In mammals and birds
the two halves of the heart are effectively separated.

The heart of reptiles and all other amniotes practically functions as four chambered heart. There
are two auricles in the heart of reptiles. The reptiles have incompletely partitioned ventricle; but in
crocodiles, the interventricular septum is complete and heart is four chambered. In all reptiles the
left and right systemic arches carry oxygenated blood and arise from a region of ventricle called

(35) V: 1.1

14. Transport

eLearn.Punjab

cavum venosum - into which left ventricle directs its blood. The deoxygenated blood from the right
atrium is directed towards the entrance of the pulmonary trunk which is also located or starts from
a pocket the cavum pulmonale, on right side of ventricle- in the animals (reptiles) which do not have
completely divided ventricle. Although the two systemic arches start from the ventricle separately,
they are also interconnected at their base by an opening. The heart of reptiles birds and mammals

functions as double circuit heart. (Fig. 14.19c).
In the birds and mammals, the heart is four -
chambered, and oxygenated and deoxygenated
blood does not mix at all. The pulmonary trunk
arises from right ventricle and leads to the lungs.

The aortic trunk emerges from the left ventricle
and leads to carotid and systemic arches. The left
systemic disappears in birds and right systemic,
most of it, disappears in mammals. (Fig. 14.19
D).

In reptile, birds and mammals, as a result of
these modifications, all blood returning to the
right side of the heart passes to the lungs. After
oxygenation, blood returns to left atrium from
the lungs via pulmonary veins. Left atrium passes
this blood to left ventricle - which on contraction
pumps it to different parts of the body, and
again blood returns to right atrium (Fig.14.18D).
Pulmonary circulation is by pulmonary arch
carrying deoxygenated blood from right ventricle
of heart to lungs, and the blood returns to left
atrium after oxygenation via pulmonary veins.

Likewise the systemic arch distributes blood
to different parts of the body, and then the
blood from the body returns to the heart, in
the right atrium via precaval and postcaval.
This is systemic circulation. So the hearts of
amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals have
both pulmonary and systemic circulation.

V:

\ Carotid

; artery
Lung
capillaries

Superior 40

pice Pulmonary

artery
Inferior Heart
Vena

Liver

Kidney
Intestine

Femoral vein

Fig. 14.19 The human circulatory system

1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

TRANSPORT IN MAN:

In humans, in addition to blood circulatory system, there is also another transport system, the
lymphatic system, described latter in this chapter.

Blood circulatory system

The circulatory system of humans have the same 3 basic components.
(A) Circulating fluid - the blood.

(B) The pumping organ - the heart.

(C) The blood vessels, arteries, capillaries and veins.

(A) The circulatory fluid-the blood

The blood is the medium in which dissolved nutrients, gases, hormones, and wastes are transported
through the body. It is made up of two main components, (i) plasma and (ii) cells or cell - like bodies
(white blood cells, red blood cells, platelets). The weight of the blood in our body is about 1/12" of
our body.

(i) PLASMA : It has been estimated that in a normal person plasma constitutes about 55% by
volume of the blood, and cells or cell-like bodies about 45% by volume of the blood.

Plasma is primarily water in which proteins, salts, nutrients and wastes are dissolved. Water
constitutes about 90% of plasma, 10% are dissolved substances. Most of the dissolved substances
are maintained at a constant or nearly constant level, but others occur in varying concentrations.

The substances dissolved or present in plasma vary in their concentrations, with the condition of
the organism and with the portion of the system under examination. The solutes can be divided
into six categories:

Inorganic salts (ions) - Plasma proteins - Organic nutrients - Nitrogenous waste products - Special
products being transported and gases which are dissolved.

1. Inorganic ions or mineral ions. Together the inorganic ions and salts make up 0.9 per cent
of the plasma, of humans, by weight; more than two thirds of this amount is sodium chloride the
ordinary table salt. Even if the total concentration of dissolved substances remains the same, shifts

(7) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

in the concentration of particular ion can create serious disturbances. The normal pH of human
blood is 7.4; and it is maintained between narrow limits, because the change in pH would affect the
chemical reactions of the body.

2. The plasma proteins constitute 7-9 percent by weight of the plasma. Most of these proteins
are synthesized in the liver. Some of the globulins, called immunoglobulins or antibodies, are
produced in response to antigens, by lymphocytes; and then are passed to plasma, and lymph.

The proteins like prothrombin acts as a catalyst in blood clotting process. Fibrinogen takes part in
the blood clotting process. Immunoglobulins play important role in body's defenses against disease.

3. Organic nutrients in the blood include, glucose, fats, phospholipids, amino acids and
lactic acids. Some of them enter the blood from the intestine (absorption). Lactic acid is produced
in muscles as a result of glycolysis, and is transported by blood to liver. Cholesterol is an important
constituent, it is metabolized to some extent, but also serves as precursor of steroid hormones.
4. Plasma also contains nitrogenous waste products formed as a result of cellular
metabolism. These products are carried from the liver where they are produced, to the organs from
where they are removed i.e. kidneys. Urea and small amounts of uric acid are present in plasma.

5. All the hormones in the body are carried by blood - so they are present in the plasma.

6. The gases such as CO,, O, are present in the plasma of the blood.

Animation 14.10: Blood Circulatory system
Source & Credit:

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

T Lymphocyte y
PB...
ae #3,

Macrophage

Fig.14.20 Red blood cells (erythrocytes) and white blood cells (leucocytes) develop from stem cells in bone marrow.

(ii) BLOOD CELLS AND CELL LIKE BODIES : These include red blood cells, (Erythrocytes),
white blood cells (leucocytes) and platelets.

(a) Red blood cells (Erythrocytes) : These are most numerous of the cells in the blood. A
cubic millimeter contains 5-1/2 million of them in males, and 4-1/2 million in females. These cells,
when formed, have nucleus, but it is lost before they enter the circulatory fluid or blood. 95% of the
cytoplasm of red blood cells is the red pigment, called haemoglobin the remaining 5% consists of
enzymes, salts and other proteins. The red cells once mature, do not divide.

Red blood cells are formed principally in the red bone marrow of short bones, such as the sternum,
ribs and vertebrae (Fig. 14.20). In the embryonic life, they are formed in the liver and spleen. The
average life span of red blood cell is about four months after which it breaks down and disintegrates

in the liver and spleen - partly by phagocytes by phagocytosis (Table -14.2)

(b) White blood cells (Leucocytes): These blood cells are colourless, as they do not contain

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

pigments. One cubic millimetre of blood contains 7000 to 8000 of them. They are much larger than
the red blood cells. There are at least five different types which can be distinguished on the basis
of the shape of the nucleus and density of granules in the cytoplasm (Table 14.2). They can be
grouped into two main types, granulocytes and agranulocytes. Granulocytes, include neutrophils,
eosinophils and basophils. They are formed in the red bone marrow (Fig. 14.20). Agranulocytes are
formed in lymphoid tissue, such as those of the lymph nodes, spleen, tonsils, adenoids and the
thymus. Agranulocytes include monocytes and lymphocytes (B and T). Monocytes stay from 10- 20
hours in the blood, then enter tissues and become tissue macrophages, performing phagocytic
function (Fig. 14.24) Lymphocytes have life spans of months or even years; but this depends on the
body's need for these cells.

Megakaryocyte

Platelets
Fig. 14.21 A macrophage in Action Fig. 14.22 The production of platelets

Animation 14.11: white blood cells
Source and Credit: gifsoup

V: 1.1

Fig. 14.23 Blood clotting

Animation 14.12: Blood Cells
Source & Credit:

‘BuN}}0}2 poo|g u! parjoau|

‘saipog jue Buisnpoid Aq
asuodsay BUNWU ay} UI suONIUN4

‘sis01A0beyd Ag
ap nied Jabs) sho.sap
yiym ‘abeydosew oy as saain

HORLEY $2522 USI MA

‘QUIWEISIY PUR SOP) Poo}q
juanaud 0) ujeday saseajay

"SapISPARC SyI}]e ‘SaIUEISGNS
BUINpold-UOIeWWe Ul SaTEAI EU

‘sisopAr0beyd Ag
gajijied jews sholjsaq

‘ap lXOIp UOUED jo junowe
jews € pue UabAxo syiodsuesy

uo}}aUN4 1o/ey

E

ou Jad 000'0Sz

sjJ22 auYm Jo %ZE

$|[82 SUN FP GE

5))39 aqua
jO.94| WEY) S87

5][99 SVIYM JO S42

s]]82 ay1ym Jo 9579

wu Jad goss

ww sad goo'oo0's

juasaud
Jaquiny abesany

sa} A20Aeqe Baw palje) MONE
auog Ul S|ja2 40 JUaWBeLYy
wwse|doisd papunog aueuquiayy)

{129 5]]y Ajeau snajanu ‘yao
pad ueyy sabe] AQybys

paqo] 0) punas wos
adeys 1eajsnu ‘sjja2 pal
WEY) Jabsey Sau) aa2yy OP OM]

paqoyiq snajnu
§]|82 Pal fo azis ayy aM] INOqYy

paqoyig snajanu
'${|a9 pad Jo azIs Buy aDIMY INOgY

paqo] aay 0} ony snajnu
‘§{|a> Pal Jo azis ayy adiMy INOqH

Ja}sWEIP Ul WW Ti g Ajayewuixoddy
‘shajINU ]NOYYM ISIP aNPIUOIIG

uondiuasag

Cp

“

s]a|a}eld

aA OudWAT "Ss

SAIOUOW "p
sayAr0jnuelby (a)

lWydoseg *¢

|iydourso3 "7

Eydouynayy *|
S$a}AI0/NueID (eB!
(sajA202na}}

Ie? POO]4 SUM

(ayA200y Asa)
1182 poolq pay


14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Leucocytes protect the body against foreign invaders, and use circulatory system to travel to the
site of invasion. Monocytes and neutrophils travel through capillaries and reach the site of wound
where bacteria have gained entry. Macrophages and neutrophils feed on bacterial invaders or
other foreign cells, including cancer cells (Fig. 14.21). They typically die in the process, and their
dead bodies accumulate and contribute to the white substance called pus, seen at infection sites.

Basophils produce heparin - a substance that inhibits blood clotting. These also produce chemicals,
such as histamine, that participate in allergic reactions and in responses to tissue damage and
microbial invasion. Lymphocytes help to provide immunity against the disease.

(c) Platelets : These are not cells, but are fragments of large cells called megakaryoctyes (Fig.
14.22). There is no nucleus in them. There is no pigment in them. Platelets help in conversion of
fibrinogen, a soluble plasma protein, into insoluble form, fibrin. The fibrin threads enmash red
blood cells and other platelets in the area of damaged tissue, ultimately forming a blood clot. The
clot serves as a temporary seal to prevent bleeding until the damaged tissue can be repaired (Fig.
14.23).

Functions of blood
The overall functions of blood in humans can be listed as follows:

i) The plasma proteins maintain colloid osmotic pressure of the blood (75% by albumins, 25% by
globulins and almost none by fibrinogen).

li) Blood helps to transport materials, in the body including nutrients, water, salts and waste
products. All hormones are transported by blood from the endocrine tissues to the target cells.

lii) Gases O, and CO, are transported by blood.

iv) Blood helps in body defenses against disease, neutrophils and monocytes engulf and destroy
invading microorganisms e.g. bacteria.

v) Blood provides immunity by the lymphocytes (pages 325-327).

vi) Blood produces interferon, and antitoxins which are proteins, and protects our body from
nucleic acids and toxins of invading organism.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

vii) Blood acts as a buffer to maintain the acid - base balance i.e. concentration of H* and OH ions
of the body.

viii) Helps in maintaining the body temperature, concentration of water and salts, thus helps in
homeostosis.

ix) Wall of Blood helps in the exchange of materials between blood and body tissue through blood
capillaries via interstitial fluid.

x) Blood helps the body in maintaining the internal environment, by producing heparin, histamines,
and also maintaining the amounts of chemicals including water and salts, in the body and
maintains body temperature to a constant or nearly constant levels.

xi) Helps in blood clotting process and seals the wounds, that stop entry of pathogens into body.

DISORDERS

There are certain disorders, related to the blood. Some of them are discussed below:

i) Leucaemia (Blood Cancer)

It is the result of uncontrolled production of white blood cells (leucocytes). This is caused by a
cancerous mutation of amyelogenous orlymphogenous cell. The Leucaemiais usually characteriszed
by greatly increased numbers of abnormal white blood cells in the circulating blood. Myelogenous
cells (bone marrow cells) are in the bone marrow - and may spread throughout the body, so that
white blood cells are produced in many other organs. These white blood cells are not completely
differentiated, and so are defective. Leucaemia may be of different types depending on the type
of white blood cells, which are undifferentiated and being produced at a faster, than normal rate.
There may be neutrophilic leucaemia, eosinophilic leucaemia, basophilic leucaemia, monocytic or
lymphocytic leucaemia. It is a very serious disorder and the patient needs to change the blood
regularly with the normal blood, got from donors. It can be cured by bone marrow transplant -
which is in most cases effective, but very expensive treatment.

li) Thalassaemia (G. Thalassa = The sea; haema = blood)
It is also called Cooley’s anaemia on the name of Thomas B. Cooley, American pediatrician. It is a

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

genetically transmitted haemoglobin abnormality. It is characterized by the presence of microcytes,
by spleenomegaly (enlargement of spleen) and by changes in the bones and skin. The blood of
these patients is to be replaced regularly, with normal blood. It can be cured by bone marrow
transplant - which is very expensive - and does not give 100% cure rate. Haemoglobin molecule in
most cases, does not have (B- chains in it, instead F.chain is present (F is foetal haemoglobin).

iii) Oedema

It means the presence of excess fluid in the tissues of the body. The excess fluid may be in the
cells, or outside the cells. The intracellular oedema is caused by osmosis of water into the cells, and
cause, depression of metabolic systems (due to lack of nutrition and O, in the tissues) especially
and the Na-pump.

The extracellular oedema may be the result of :

i) Abnormal leakage of fluid from the blood capillaries or failure of the lymphatic system to return
fluid from the interstitial fluid.

li) Oedma is caused by renal retention of salts and water. Oedema disturbs the exchange and
concentration of minerals and ions in the blood and body cells, affects blood pressure, increases
heart load etc.

(B) Pumping Organ - The Heart

Structure and action : The heart of humans is located in the chest cavity. The heart is enclosed in
a double membranous Sac - the pericardial cavity, which contains the pericardial fluid. Pericardium
protects the heart, prevents it from over extension.

The wall of the heart is composed of three layers.
(i) Epicardium = (ii) Myocardium (iii) Endocardium
Myocardium of the heart is made up of special type of muscles, the cardiac muscles.

These muscles contain myofibrils, and myofilaments of myosin and actin. Their arrangement is
similar to those in skeletal muscle fibres, and their mechanism of contraction is essentially the
same, except that they are branched cells, in which the successive cells are separated by junctions
called intercalated discs. The heart contracts automatically with rhythmicity, under the control of
the autonomic nervous system of the body.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Aorta

Pulmonary artery

(to left lung)

Superior Semilunar valves

Venda Cava

Pulmonary artery

(to right lung) “~~

Pulmonary veins
(from right lung)

= f

Pulmonary veins
ee ~_{from left lung)
us.

’ Atrioventricular valve
Left ventricle (bicuspid)

Ventricular septum

Inferior Right
Atrioventricular valve = Yang cava Ventrical
(tricuspid) Descending aorta
{to lower body)

Heart muscle

Fig 14.24 The human heart and its valves and vessels.

There are four chambers of the heart: two upper thin-walled atria, and two lower thick walled
ventricles. Human heart functions as a double pump, and is responsible for pulmonary and systemic
circulation. Complete separation of deoxygenated blood (Right side) and oxygenated blood (left
Side), in the heart, is maintained. The right atrium receives deoxygenated blood via venae cavae
from the body.

The blood is passed on to right ventricle through tricuspid valve (called so because it has 3 flaps).
These flaps are attached with fibrous cords called chordeae tendinae, to the papillary muscles
which are extensions of the wall of the right ventricle. When right ventricle contracts, the blood is

V: 1.1

passed to pulmonary trunk, which carries blood via left and right pulmonary arteries, to the lungs.
At the base of the pulmonary trunk, semilunar valves are present. After oxygenation in lungs the
blood is brought by pulmonary veins to the left atrium, which passes this blood via bicuspid valve
(called so because it has two flaps) to the left ventricle. The flaps of bicuspid valve are similarly
attached through chordae tendinae, to papillary muscles of the wall of left ventricle. When the left
ventricle contracts, it pushes the blood through aorta to all parts of the body (except lungs). At the
base of aorta semilunar valves are also present. The valves of the heart control the direction of flow
of blood. The wall of left ventricle is thicker (about 3 times) than that of the right ventricle. At the base
of aorta, first pair of arteries,
the coronary arteries, arise,
and supply blood to the heart.
The aorta forms an arch, and
before descending down gives
three branches — supplying
blood to head, arms and
shoulders. The aorta descends
down in the chest cavity. It
gives many small branches to
the chest wall and then passes
down to the abdominal region.
Here it gives branches, which : <a
supply blood to different parts intercalated disc”

of alimentary canal, kidneys with many gap junction nucleus
and the lower abdomen.

Fig.14.25 The structure of cardiac muscle

The aorta Bifurcates into iliac arteries, each of whichleads to supply blood to eachlegs. The blood from
the upper part of the body is collected by different veins, which join to form superior vena cava; which
passits bloodtotherightatrium. Twolliac veins are formed byveins which collect bloodfromlegs, and
unite to from inferior vena cava. It receives renal vein from each kidney; and hepatic vein from the
liver, before it enters the right atrium. The liver receives hepatic portal vein which is formed by many
veins collecting deoxygenated blood with absorbed food from different parts of alimentary canal.

The Cardiac Cycle
It is the sequence of events which take place during the completion of one heart beat. Heart beat
involves three distinct stages (Fig. 14.26).

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab
T. Relaxation phasé- diastole. £ ©.

The deoxygenated blood enters right atrium through vena cava, and oxygenated blood enters left
atrium through pulmonary veins. The walls of the atria and that of ventricles are relaxed. As the
atria are filled with blood, they become distended and have more pressure than the ventricles. This
relaxed period of heart chambers is called diastole.

2. Atria Contract - atrial systole

The muscles of atria simultaneously contract, when the atria are filled and distended with blood,
this is called atrial systole. The blood passes through tricuspid and bicuspid valves, into the two
ventricles which are relaxed.

3. Ventricles contract - ventricular systole
When the ventricles receive blood from atria, both ventricles contract simultaneously and the blood
is pumped to pulmonary arteries and aorta. The tricuspid and bicuspid valves close, and ‘lubb’
sound is made. Ventricular systole ends, and ventricles relax at the same time semilunar valves
at the base of pulmonary artery and aorta close simultaneously, and ‘dubb’ sound is made. (Lubb,
dubb can be heard with the help of a stethoscope).

One complete heart beat consists of one systole and one diastole, and lasts for about 0.8 seconds.
In one’s life, heart contracts about 2.5 billion times, without stopping.

Oxygen-depleted
blood toLungs

Oxygen-rich —
_ » bloodtobody . .

blood from body
(a) Atria contract (b) Ventricle contract (c) End of cardiac cycle

Fig.14.26 The cardiac cycle

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Mechanism of heart Excitation and Contraction
The heart beat cycle described above starts when the sino-atrial node (Pace maker) at the upper end
of right atrium sends out electrical impulses to the atrial muscles, and causing both atria to contract.
The sino-atrial node consists of a small number of diffusely oriented cardiac fibres, possessing few
myofibrils; and few nerve endings from
the autonomic nervous system.

Atrioventricular
node
(AV node)

Impulses from the node travel to the Sinoatrial
musculature of the atrium and to mede ~~
an atrioventricular node. From it an Anode)
atrioventricular bundle of muscle fibres

propagates the regulatory impulses

via excitable fibres in interventricular

septum, to  themyocardium — of

the ventricles. There is a _ delay

of approximately 0.15 second _ in
conductance from the S-A node to A-V

node, permitting atrial systole to be Excitable
completed before ventricular systole fibers
begins (Fig. 14.28). Fig.14.27 The heart’s pacemaker and its connections

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Electrocardiogram
As the cardiac impulse passes through the heart, electrical currents spread into the tissues
surrounding the heart, and a small proportion of these spread all the way on the surface of the

Atrial/
Atrial Ventricular ventricular
svstole s¥stole diastole

A normal electrocardiogram (ECG) indicates that the heart is functioning properly. The P wave
occurs just prior to atrial contraction; the QRS wave occurs just prior to ventricular contraction
and the T wave occurs when the ventricles are recovering from contraction.

body. If electrodes are placed on the skin on opposite sides of the heart, electrical potentials
generated by these currents can be recorded. This recording is known as electro cardiogram which
is taken by electrocardiograph (E.C.G.) machine. It helps to diagonose the abnormalities in the
rhythmicity and conduction system of the heart which may be corrected by the use of artificial
pacemaker.

Artificial pace maker

Pacemaker is responsible for initiating the impulses which trigger the heart beat rate. If there
is some block in the flow of the electrical impulses, or if the impulses initiated by S.A. node are
weak; it may lead to death of the individual. So an artificial pacemaker, which is battery operated
producing electrical stimulus is used. For example if A-V pathway is blocked, the electrodes of
artificial pacemaker are attached to the ventricle. Then this pacemaker provides continued rhythmic
impulses that take over the control of the ventricles.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Blue babies

Failure of interatrial foramen (an opening in the inter-atrial septum) to close or of ductus arteriosus
to fully constrict results in cyanosis (blueness of skin) of new bom. This is due to mixing of blood
between two atria and the mixed blood is supplied to the body of newborn babies resulting in
blueness of skin, thus the name blue babies.

(C) Blood vessels
The third component of the blood circulatory system of humans comprises of the blood vessels;
arteries, capillaries and veins.

(i) Arteries : These are blood vessels which carry blood away from the heart to different parts
of the body. The wall of the arteries is made up of three layers, outer, (made of connective tissue
and elastic fibres), middle (made of thick muscular tissue and elastic fibres) and inner, endothelium
(Table 14-3, and Fig 14.30).

The contraction of the circular (smooth muscles) of arteries and arterioles is under the control of
nervous and endocrine systems. When stimulated the muscle contracts, constricting the arterioles
(vasoconstriction) and thus reducing the flow of blood in them.

When the muscles are relaxed the arterioles are dilated (vasodilation) more blood flows in them,
The arterioles themselves divide repeatedly until they form a dense network of microscopic vessels,
called capillaries.

Atherosclerosis (G. athere = porridge; skeleoris = hardening): It is coexisting atheroma and
arteriosclerosis; atheroma is deposition of hard yellow plaque of lipoid material in the inner most
layer of the arteries, which may be due to high level of cholesterol in the blood.Arteriosclerosis
is a degenerative arterial change associated with advancing age. Primarily a thickening of middle
layer of arteries, and usually associated with some degree of atheroma. So Atherosclerosis causes
narrowing and hardening of arteries. This increases the risk of formation of thrombus (see thrombus
formation), and if thrombus is formed in the brain or heart it is fatal. (Atherosclerosis is a major
condition leading to heart attack.

(ii) Capillaries : These are blood vessels with walls that are only one cell thick (Table 4.3, Fig. 14.29,
14.30). Although the blood appears confined within the capillary walls, the latter are permeable with
the result, that water and dissolved substances pass in and out exchanging oxygen, carbon dioxide
dissolved food and excretory products with 6) — around capillary. The capillary network is

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

so dense that no living cell is far from a supply of oxygen and food. In the liver, every cell is in
direct contact with a capillary. The diameter of a capillary can be altered by nervous stimulation,
which tends to close them, and by chemicals, such as histamine, which dilate them. The change in
diameter is brought about by a change in the shape of the cells, constituting their walls. The pre
capillary sphincters also regulate the amount of blood flowing in capillaries. Thus the amount of
blood flowing in a certain tissue is controlled.

The capillaries are the sites where the materials are exchanged between the blood and body tissues.
This exchange occurs in three ways.

(i) Active transport and diffusion through the cells lining the capillary wall into the interstitial or
extracellular fluid, and then to the body cells, and vice versa.

(ii) Through the intercellular spaces of endothelial lining of wall of capillary to and from the
extracellular fluid.

(iii) Materials from the cavity of capillaries are also taken up by endocytosis, and then passed to
the other side by exocytosis. Same is true for some materials entering from the interceullar
spaces (extracellular fluid) into the blood.

Thus the exchange of materials takes place between blood and tissues via extracellular or interstitial
fluid. Capillaries join to form venules, which join to form veins.

(iii) Veins : These blood vessels transport blood from body cells towards heart. The wall of veins
has same three layers as are present in arteries. But middle layer is relatively thin and only slightly
muscular, with few elastic fibres, (table 14.3 and Fig. 14.30). The semilunar valves are present in the
veins. These valves prevent the back flow of blood, as it is moving towards the heart. The pressure
of surrounding muscles, when they contract, tends to squash the veins and assist the return of
blood towards heart.

Veins join to form larger veins, and ultimately form venae cavae (Inferior vena cava and superior

vena cava) which pour the blood into the right atrium of the heart. The oxygenated blood from the
lungs is brought to the left atrium by pulmonary veins.

(52) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Blood flow

Extracellular fluid

Water

Oxygen
Nutrients

Carbon
dioxide

Nitrogenous
Waste

Water

CapillSary nei

Fig.14.29 The exchange of gases and nutrients in a capillary.

The pressure within capillaries causes a continuous leakage of fluid from the blood plasma into
the spaces that surround the capillaries and tissues. This fluid, known as interstitial fluid consists
primarily of water, in which the dissolved nutrients, hormones gases, wastes, and small proteins
from the blood are present. Large proteins red blood cells and platelets cannot cross the intercellular
spaces of capillary wall, so they remain within capillaries. But some white blood cells can squeeze
out through the intercellular spaces of capillary wall. Interstitial fluid is the medium through which
the exchange of materials between the blood and nearby cell occurs. (Fig. 14.29)

(53) V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Connective tissue © J Connective tissue

Smooth muscle

(a) Artery (b) Capillary (c) vein

Fig.14.30 Showing the comparison in structure of artery, capillary and vein.

Animation 14.174: Structure of artery
Source & Credit:

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Table 14.3 Comparison in structure and function of an artery, capillary and vein

| Arteries Veins Capillaries

. These transport blood away |1. These collect blood from 1. These link arteries with veins.
from the heart to the various body through capillaries and
parts of the body through transp ort it towards heart.
capillaries.

. All arteries carry oxygenated | 2. All veins carry deoxygenated | 2. Thesehave mixed oxygenated
blood except pulmonary blood except pulmonary and deoxygenated blood.

arteries. veins.
. There are no valves in them |3. Valves are present. These __|3. There are no valves.

except at the base of prevent the back flow of
pulmonary trunk and aorta. blood.

4. Have high blood pressure. |4. Have low blood pressure. _|4. Falling pressure in these.

5. Wave of blood pressure or |5. No pulse. 5. No pulse.
pulse due toheartbeat can
be detected.

6. Blood flowrapid. 400-500mm | 6 . Rate of blood flow increases |6. Blood flow slowest less than
per second in aorta and from smaller to larger veins. | 1mm per second.
decreasing in arteries and
arterioles.

7. Have smaller bore and thick |7. Have larger bore andthin |7. Larger bore; wall one cell in
wall. walls. thickness.

8. Thick muscle layer and elastic} 8. Thin muscle layer and less |8. No muscles or elastic fibres.
fibres present. The elasticity| elastic fibres. So they are less
helps changing the pulsating| — elastic.
flow of blood.

9. No exchange of materials. |9. No exchange of materials. |9. Responsible for exchange of
materials.

Blood Pressure and Rate of flow of Blood

It is the measure of force with which blood pushes up against the walls of blood vessels. It is
the force that keeps blood flowing from the heart to all the capillary networks in the body. This
pressure is generated by the contraction of ventricles (ventricle systole) and is the highest in aorta,
then gradually reduces in arteries. The walls of arteries are elastic and the flow of blood stretches
them, and it is felt as pulse. During diastole, the relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle, the heart is
not exerting pressure on the blood in the arteries and pressure in them falls. The pressure reaches

(55) V: 1.1


14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

its high point during systole (systolic pressure which in normal individuals is 120 mm Hg) and its
low point during diastole (diastolic pressure which in normal individuals ranges between 75-85
mm Hg). The blood pressure gradually declines (Fig. 14.31). The decline of the blood pressure in
successive parts of systemic circuit, is the result of friction between the flowing blood and the walls
of the blood vessels - thus blood moves from a region of higher pressure towards a region of lower
pressure.

Several other changes occur along the route of blood flow.

i) The difference between systolic and diastolic pressure continues to diminish until it disappears
in the capillaries and veins.

li) The rate of blood flow tends to fall as the blood moves through the branching arteries and
arterioles, the rate is lowest in the capillaries; and increases again in the venules and veins. These
changes in rate of blood flow result from changes in the total cross sectional area of the vessel
system. The flow of blood in veins is maintained by the contraction of surrounding muscles and the
action of semilunar valves which prevent back flow of blood. Muscular activity including breathing
movements help normal flow of blood in the body.

Mean pressure
value

Veins cave

Fig.14.31(a) graph of blood pressure in different parts of the human circulatory system.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Velocity (cm/sec)

fe ty de

2eesesae

Aorta

Arteries
Cross-sectional
area

Arterioles
Capillaries

Venules

Velocity

Vengo cuva

(Cross-sectional area
(em?)

Fig.14.31 (b)Change in the velocity of blood flow in the various parts of a systemic circulatory pathway.

Hypertension
It is a condition of high blood pressure. Prolonged high blood pressure damages the lining of the
blood vessels and also leads to weakening of heart muscles (which have become thickened due
to the continuous strain imposed on them), with declining efficiency of the pumping action of the
heart. Blood may then be retained in the heart and lungs, often leading to fatal condition called
congestive heart failure.

Thrombus Formation and Hypertension
Thrombus is asolid mass or plug of blood constituents
(clot) in a blood vessel. This mass may block (wholly
or only in part) the vessels in which it forms, or it may
be dislodged and carried to some other location in
the circulatory system, in which case it is called an
embolus. Thrombosis is the formation of thrombus
(Fig. 14.32). Thromboembolism is leading cause of
deaths in western civilization.

14.32 A thrombus in a small blood vessel. The thrombus (tangled red
mass) has blocked blood flow near a point where the vessel branches.
The blood has pulled away from the left end of the thrombus and is
beginning to pull away from the right end also.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Thrombus formation may be due the following:

I) Irritation or infection of lining of blood vessels.

li) Reduced rate of blood flow, due to long periods
of inactivity.

iii) Pneumonia and tuberculosis, emphysema

Heart attack (Myocardial infarction)

Blockage of blood vessel in the heart by an embolus (or by locally formed thrombus) causes necrosis
or damage to portion of heart muscles, a condition known as a heart attack or technically myocardial
infarction, Heart attack is due to disruptions of control system of the heart with accompanying
arrhythmias, especially ventricular fibrillation.

We can avoid the above mentioned situations if we :

i) Avoid too much fatty food (especially rich in cholesterol). Maintain normal body weight.
ii) Control blood pressure by regular walk and exercise.

iii) Do not smoke.

Stroke

If the normal flow of blood is blocked by an embolus (or a locally formed thrombus), in a blood
vessel in the brain, and causes necrosis, or death, of the surrounding neural tissue (owing to lack
of O,), the condition is called a stroke or cerebral infarction. The symptoms of the stroke vary
depending on the part of the brain that has been damaged.

Haemorrhage

It is the discharge of blood from blood vessels. Especially important is the brain haemorrhage which
results from bursting of any of the arteries supplying the brain. When the wall of the arteries becomes
hard and loses its elasticity - and higher blood pressures would result in brain haemorrhage. To
avoid brain haemorrhage, the blood pressure must be controlled between normal limits.

In almost all the above mentioned problems, it is important to take following preventive measures :

* Taking in of less cholesterol in our food. Maintenance of normal blood pressure.
* Do not become over weight.

* Do not smoke.

* Do regular exercise.

« Avoid stress and tension.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

LYMPHATIC SYSTEM

This system is responsible for the transport and returning of materials from the tissues of the body
to the blood.

The system comprises lymph capillaries, lymph vessels, lymphoid masses, lymph nodes, and lymph-
the fluid which flows in the system.

Lymph capillaries end blindly in the body tissues, where pressure from the accumulation of
interstitial fluid or extracellular fluid forces the fluid into the lymph capillaries. When this fluid
enters the lymph capillaries, it is called lymph. The lymph vessels empty in veins; so lymph is a fluid

in transit between interstitial fluid and the blood.

The intercellular spaces in the walls of lymph vessels are larger than those of the capillaries of blood
vascular system. So larger molecules, from the interstitial fluid can also enter the lymph capillaries.

Lymph capillaries join to form larger and larger lymph vessels; and ultimately form thoracic lymph
duct, which opens into subclavian vein. The flow of lymph is always towards the thoracic duct.

In the intestine, the branches of lymph capillaries, within villi, are called lacteals.
The flow of lymph is maintained by :

Activity of skeletal muscles, movement of viscera, breathing movements and the valves, which
prevent back flow of lymph.

Along the pathway, the lymph vessels have, at certain points, masses of connective tissue where
lymphocytes are present; these are lymph nodes. Several afferent lymph vessels enter a lymph
node, which is drained by a single, efferent lymph vessels.

Lymph nodes are present in the neck region, axilla and groin of humans.

In addition, several lymphoid masses are present in the walls of digestive tract, in the mucosa and
submucosa. The larger masses spleen and thymus, tonsils and adenoids are all lymphoid masses.

These produce lymphocytes.
V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Lymphatic ‘i

Lymphatic atict

duct

Thymus

Lymph ,
nodes Ly

Bone
marrow

vessels

Fig. 14.33 Human lymphatic system.

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

There are the several functions performed by lymphatic system.

I) In an average person, about three litres more fluid leaves the blood capillaries than is
reabsorbed by them each day. It returns this excess fluid and its dissolved proteins and other
Substances to the blood.

li) The lacteals of villi absorb large fat globules, which are released by interstitial cells after the
products of digestion of fats are absorbed. After a fatty meal these fat globules may make
up 1% of the lymph.

lili) The lymphatic system helps defend the body against foreign invaders. Lymph nodes have
lymphocytes and macrophages that destroy bacteria and viruses. The painful swelling of
lymph nodes in certain diseases (mumps is an extreme example) is largely a result of the
accumulation of dead lymphocytes and macrophages.

iv) Just as the lymph nodes filter lymph, the spleen filters blood, exposing it to macrophages and
lymphoctyes that destroy foreign particles and aged red blood cells.

IMMUNITY - AND ITS TYPES

Immunity

The capacity to recognize the intrusion of any material foreign to the body and to mobilize cells
and cell products to help remove the particular sort of foreign material with greater speed and
effectiveness” is called immunity.

In animals in addition to physical barriers (skin + mucous membranes) and phagocytes, there is a
third mechanism, to defend their bodies against the foreign
invaders; this is the immune system.

The components of immune system include the lymphocytes
(B and T) and the antibodies - which are special type of proteins.
These antibodies are immunoglobulins which are synthesized
by vertebrates, in response to antigens; and immobilise it, or
sets in motion events that ultimately cause its destruction.


14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Antigen or immunogen is a foreign substance, often a protein which stimulates the formation
of antibodies (Fig. 14.34) Antibodies are specific i.e. cause the destruction of the antigen, which
stimulated their production. Antibodies are manufactured in B-lymphocytes , then

secreted in to the lymph and blood where they circulate freely.

Antigen- Antigen-

binding binding +

site site

Ly at
Cells with surface complementary

antigens to antigens

(b) Antigen-antibody complex

Fig. 14.34 (a) An antibody molecule consists of four polypeptide chains - two identical light chain and two identical heavychains - linked
by disulfide (- S - S -) bridges. Variable amino acid sequences (V) in the light chains and upper regions of the heavy chains determine
which antigen will bind to that particular antibody. Constant amino acid sequences (C) are the same for all the antibodies in one class
(b) Large antigen-antibody complexes will form if there are multiple copies of the antigenic molecule on the foreign cell’s surface.

T-cells recognize antigen, then combat micro-organisms and / or effect the rejection of foreign
tissues (in case of tissue transplant). This is called cell-mediated response.

B-cells recognize antigen and form plasma cell clone. These plasma cells synthesise and liberate
antibodies into the blood plasma and tissue fluid. Here antibodies attach to the surfaces of bacteria
and speed up their phagocytosis, or combine with and neutralise toxins produced by micro-
organisms, by producing antitoxins. This is called humoral Immune response.

When we get vaccination, against a specific disease (antigen), we become immune to that infection

or disease. If we get vaccination against, polio, smallpox, measles, mumps etc., once in our life time,
we are protected or become immune to that infection in our future life.

V: 1.1

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Types of immunity

Active Immunity : The use of vaccines, which stimulate the production of antibodies in the body,
and making a person immune against the disease or infection, is called active immunity. But this
active immunity has been achieved by artificially introducing, antigens in the body, so it is called
artificially induced active immunity.

But, when a person is exposed to an infection (antigen) - becomes ill, and in
most cases survives then this immunity, developed against that disease is called
naturally induced immunity or auto immune response.

Passive immunity : In contrast to active immunity, in which case antigens are introduced to
stimulate the production of antibodies, by artificial or natural method; antibodies are injected in
the form of antisera, to make a person immune against a disease, This is called passive immunity.

In body, antigen - antibody complexes are formed which are taken up by phagocytes and destroyed.
The patient is spared the complications (or possibly death) caused by the infection or venom.

Passive immunity response is immediate, but not long lasting. Because no time is taken for the
production of sufficient level of antibodies, (as antibodies are being injected) and after the level of
antibodies is reduced or they are used up - No more antibodies production is there.

The method of passive immunization
is used to combat active infections of,
tetanus, infectious hepatitis, rabies, snake
bite venom etc. In the case of snake bite
venom passive immunity is produced by the
antitoxins so the serum is called antivenom
serum.

V: 1.1

14. Transport

eLearn.Punjab

EXERCISE

Q.1__ ‘Fill in the blanks:

(i) Inthe process of facilitated diffusion, the carrier molecules are

(ii) Pure water has a water potential which is equal to

(iii) The insects which feed on the phloem of plants are the

(iv) The substance produced by basophils which inhibits blood-clotting is
(v) The most abundant compound of blood plasma of manis

(Vi) hessecseseeeeseeeeseeees in 1874 suggested that water molecules move along the cells walls of
xylem vessels due to imbibition.

Q.2. Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘false’ and write the correct statement if it is
false.

(i) The intercellular openings in the blood capillaries are larger than the openings in the
lymph capillaries.

(ii) Between the left auricle and the left ventricle in human heart, the valve present is
called tricuspid valve.

(iii) | The pacemaker of the heart of man is the AV node.
(iv) Each sieve tube member is associated with one or more tracheid cells.

(v) |The method of active immunization is used to combat active infections of tetanus and
rabies.

V: 1.1

Q.3.

(i)

(ii)

(ili)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(ix)

14. Transport eLearn.Punjab

Extensive Questions

How are minerals and water taken up by roots? Draw the structures involved and the
pathways for water and minerals from soil water to xylem, and the transport processes at
each step.

Describe the mechanism of opening and closing of stomata.

How does the pressure-flow theory explain the movement of sugars through a plant?
Describe cohesion-tension theory of water movement in xylem. What supplies the cohesion,
and what is the source of tension? How do these two forces interact to move water through

plant,

Explain, apoplast, symplast and vacuolar pathways, and describe the movement of water
and dissolved minerals, through them.

Explain water potential. What is the relationship of water potential with solute potential and
pressure potential?

Name and describe the general functions of the three major type of cells or cell like bodies
found in blood of humans. Which of these cell types is found predominantly in lymph?

Write a note on immunity and its types.

V: 1.1

