CHAPTER

ie Homeostasis

Animation 15 : Homeostasis

ource & Credit: Wikispaces

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

CONCEPTS IN HOMEOSTASIS

Each organism of a species has assumed, in evolutionary history, a specific set up of internal
environment at various levels of organization suitable to its surroundingsi.e., external environment.
External environment and its components fluctuate continuously, however, the organism resists
and manages these changes by making adjustments to keep its own internal fluctuations within a
narrow range thus protecting internal environment from the harms of the external fluctuations.
The protection of internal environment from the harms of fluctuations in external environment is
termed as homeostasis. The homeostasis keeps the internal fluctuations in a narrow range with
various control systems compared to wider external fluctuations.

Most susceptible components of internal environment that may be affected by fluctuations in
external environments are water, solutes and temperature. Also the mechanism an organism
has adapted to eliminate harmful nitrogenous wastes depends upon the availability of water. The
mechanism of regulation, generally between organism and its environment, of solute and the
gain and loss of water is osmoregulation. The mechanism which eliminates nitrogenous waste is
referred as excretion, whereas maintenance of internal temperature within a tolerable range is
designated as thermoregulation.

Likewise the control systems among intracellular and extracellular internal environment of an
organism also at cell level keep fluctuating in narrow range in intracellular, within cell membrane,
compared to in extracellular (vascular and other interstitial fluids) environment. Here, in addition
to solute and water various essential metabolites, hormones etc. are kept in a required range.
Homeostasis does not mean to keep a fixed internal environment as changes maintained within
a specific range are necessary for normal body functions. For example, water availability may
fluctuate tremendously for the organisms in the external environment from abundant supply
to almost dry conditions, however, the quantity of water in the body i.e. internal environment
may vary in response to abundant supply and dry condition, but in a narrow range. The control
systems would not let the body flooded with water in abundant supply and also not to dehydrate
in dry conditions. Furthermore, adaptation to lower level of range in dry conditions and to higher
level of range in abundant supply of water is good for the organism to feel normal within internal
fluctuations forced by drastic external fluctuations.

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

The control systems have been acquired for the variety of homeostatic regulations. These living
control systems work exactly on the mechanism of physical control system. It has three components:
receptor, control centre and an effector. In a physical control system e.g. temperature control
system, there is a sensor (thermometer) that monitors temperature change from a set point and
Signals to control centre to take action by switching on heater or cooling units in response to drop
or rise in the temperature compared to set point. Similar to it in living system there is set point in
temperature regulated (endothermic) animals. The receptors (sensor) detect temperature change,
e.g. of increase and signal to control centre for action of cooling systems and the vice versa. Detection
of change and signalling for effector’s response to control system is a feedback mechanism. In
these processes there is an inverse effector’s response to the change in external environment as
there is generally cooling effector’s response to warmth sensing in external environment, thus are
termed as negative feedback (Fig. 15.1).

Animation 15.1 : Homeostasis

ource & Credit: (Dynamic \Science

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

External Environment
uctuations In wide rage

Restrict
Fluctuations in narrow range

Intra cellular enviornment

Organism’s internal envirnment

Fig.15.1. Homeostasis: Controlling systems lower fluctuations in internal environments

OSMOREGULATION

Water relations of cell

Water is the solvent of the solutes in the cell. Each cell has been adapted to a defined quantity of
water in relation to salts in it to perform its functions. Homeostatic mechanisms generally maintain
this concentration.

Balance of water and solutes in the body

Cells consistently encounter changing extracellular environment. It may be of diluted solution
compared to the cell concentration, thus designated as hypotonic environment. The more
concentrated external environment is termed as hypertonic and that resembles to internal
solution is the isotonic.

The hypotonic environment osmotically causes entry of water into the cell and renders the cell

solutions diluted. The cell

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

also becomes turgid. Thus it may be harmed (Fig. 15.2a). The hypertonic environment, on the
other hand; renders cell solutions concentrated and shrinks the cell due to loss of water (Fig.
15.2c). To prevent these situations cells osmoregulate themselves to keep water and salts balance
in plants and animals.

Normal cell Shrunken cell

Hypotonic lsotonic Hypertonic

(a) (D) (Cc)

Fig. 15.2 Response of the cell to various external environments i.e. different concentrations of
solution without any regulation with control system at cell membrane, cell remains in
normal state despite .differences in its internal to external environments.

Animation 15.2: O gulati
Source and Credit{Andrew Biology
Osmoregulation in Plants

Plants are distributed in different habitats of aquatic, moderate and severely dry terrestrial nature,
thus termed as hydrophytes, mesophytes and xerophytes, respectively.

©)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Hydrophytes have the adaptations to remove the flooding of its cells in fresh water. In this type the
surface area of leaves is very large to transpire water excessively. Extensive stomata are present on
the upper surface facing the atmosphere to promote loss of water (Fig. 15.3a).

Mesophytes have moderate water availability. In sufficient supply of water stomata are kept open
to promote loss of excess water, however, in restricted supply stomata close to prevent the loss
e.g. Brassica, rose, mango etc.

Xerophytes have the adaptations for reduced rate of transpiration. Many xerophytes possess
small, thick leaves to limit water loss by reducing surface area proportional to the volume. Their
cuticle is thick, waxy and leathery. Stomata are on lower surface of leaves and located in depression.
Some as cacti, during the driest season, shed their leaves to restrict transpiration completely, thus
stems are the photosynthetic organs. In rainy season, stem stores water for use in dry conditions
(Fig. 15.3b).

Animation 15.3: Osmoregulation in plants
Source and Credit:

©)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 15.3a. A hydrophytic plant Fig.15.3b. A xerophytic plant

Osmoregulation in Animals

Animal cells require more critical balance of water and solutes in the body as they cannot survive
a net water gain or loss. Water continuously leaves and enters the cells; however, the quantity of
the water and the solutes is kept in balance. There are two approaches in maintaining this balance.

1. Animal body fluids are kept isotonic to the external environment even for marine saltwater
environment. These animals thus do not require actively to adjust their internal osmotic state, so
are known as osmoconformers.

2. The animals whose body fluid concentrations differ noticeably the outside environment
actively regulate to discharge excess water in hypotonic and excrete salts in hypertonic
conditions therefore, are called as osmoregulators. Animals inhabiting different environments
have distinct adaptations to regulate osmotic balance, e.g. marine, fresh water and terrestrial
environments.

@

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Osmoregulation in Different Environments

Most marine invertebrates are osmoconformers. Among the vertebrates hagfishes are
isotonic with the surrounding sea’s water. Most cartilaginous fishes maintain lower, internal salt
concentration than that of seawater. Their kidneys for osmoregulation excrete salts through
gills and also possess salt excreting organs such as rectal glands. These employ active transport
mechanism to remove salt against osmotic gradient. Some fishes have relatively low salts in body
fluids but have rendered these hypertonic to that of seawater by retaining urea in adequate
concentration. Because urea in high concentration is damaging so these fishes retain another
chemical trimethylamine oxide(TMAO) for protection against urea. Bony fishes, the descendents
of fresh water ancestors but later became marine constantly lose water from their hypotonic body
fluids to hypertonic environments. These fishes have adapted themselves to drink large amount
of seas water and excrete concentrated urine resulting in maximum salt excretion and minimum
water loss (Fig. 15.4a).

Passive goin of water
“Atiess body surface

Litrept amount of
hypotonic urine
contains little salts
Scanty amount of isotonic
uring conlains some salts
(a) Marine fish (a) Fresh water fish

Fig.15.4. Osmoregulation in: (a) Marine fish (b) Fresh water fish

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Fresh Water: Fresh water animals are constantly facing the osmotic flooding of body fluids and
loss of salts. Fresh water protozoa, Amoeba and Paramecium pump out excess water by structures
contractile vacuoles. Many fresh water animals including fishes remove excess water by producing
large volumes of very dilute urine. The loss of salts is compensated by preference of salt containing
food and by active uptake of salts by gills and skin (Fig. 15.4b).

Terrestrial: The evaporative loss of water leading to dehydration is the major problem for terrestrial
life. Arthropods and vertebrates have successfully adapted to terrestrial mode of life. Terrestrial
animals are covered by body surface, which prevents loss of water as the waxy exoskeletons of
insects and multi-layered dead, keratinized skin cells of most terrestrial vertebrates. Drinking and
eating moist foods compensate the loss of water. These animals also have metabolic and behavioral
adaptations. Some desert mammals e.g. kangaroo rat survives without drinking water by feeding
on seeds of desert plants containing more carbohydrates, which produce water of metabolism.
Terrestrial animals produce concentrate urine in their kidneys that reabsorb most filtered water
in the process of excretion. Terrestrial animals can tolerate dehydration and it differs in various
animals. This characteristic is known as anhydrobiosis.

EXCRETION

Among the assimilated nutrients in animals, carbohydrates and lipids are metabolized to CO,
and H,0. Proteins and nucleoproteins metabolism produces waste nitrogen in various forms in
different animals. The waste nitrogen proves toxic if it is concentrated in the cell, therefore, it must
be removed from the body. The elimination of wasteful metabolites, mainly of the nitrogenous
nature is called excretion.

In contrast, the mechanism of excretion in plants is different. Plants in their autotrophic mode of
life produce oxygen and in metabolism produce CO, and H,0 as the excretory products. Plants also
produce several organic and inorganic compounds which are stored for various purposes and are
also removed when necessary.

Plant cells have large vacuoles; these can be used for either storage of useful compounds, or the
storage of waste substances. These may accumulate at the concentrations that lead to crystal
formation in the vacuoles. Plants produce certain wastes of inorganic and organic nature, which
are Stored in certain organs.

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

The leaves are the prominent organs for this purpose. These leaves are destined to fall off, as is the
case of autumn leaves in plants or die off as happens in the leaves and stalk of certain bulbs e.g.
bluebell, leaving the bulb underground. This is the reason gardener find rotted autumn leaves a
good source of minerals. The falling of yellow leaves in autumn is th

seasonal time for the plants to get rid of the accumulated wastes and because of the reason leaves
are said to be excretophore. According to an explanation the change in color in these leaves is not
due to removal of chlorophyll as the microscopic examination of autumn leaves shows that leaves
are loaded with pigmented compounds prior to falling off and many toxic materials like heavy
metals increase sharply as the yellowing proceeds.

Some trees deposit strange chemicals in their branches and trunks, especially in old xylem which is
no longer used for water transport. This takes place in ebony which produces very black wood in
the center.These are considered to be, waste materials by plant physiologists.

Some plants will actively secrete waste compounds into the soil, occasionally using them as chemical
weapons against other competing plants e.g conifers.

Animation 15.4: Osmoregulation in plants
Source and Credit] Living Blo.net

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Keeping in view the definition of excretion, as discussed earlier, that it is the elimination of waste
metabolites several products may beincludedinthe list of excretory products. Waterduetoits removal
inhypo osmotic environmentis labelled as an excretory productin these specific conditions.Similarly,
salts removed by animals in hypertonic environment are the excretory products for these animals.

Otherwise, overwhelmingly, nitrogenous waste metabolites constitute the excretory products.
Primarily, in the catabolism of animo acids the amino group (---NH,) is released (deamination)
or transferred to another molecule for removal or reuse. Amino group not reused for recycling of
amino acids is essentially dissolved in water and excreted to avoid toxic rise in the plasma. Elevated
levels of these wastes can cause convulsions, coma and eventually death. Mostly excess nitrogen
is excreted by animals as ammonia, urea or uric acid (Fig. 15.5). Lower quantities of nitrogen are
excreted in the form of other compounds such as Creatinine, creatine or trimethylamine oxide
and in very small quantities as amino acids, purines and pyrimidines. Metabolism of purine and
pyrimidine bases produces significant amount of nitrogenous wastes of hypoxanthine, xanthine,
uric acid, allantoin, urea and ammonia.

| Proteins | Nucleic acids
_ j
¥ 1 a — — —
Amino acids Nitrogenous bases |
| J
¥
-NH,

Amino group

i a B
bas a %

Most aquatic animal, Mammals, most amphibians, Birds, insects, many
including many fishes sharks, some bony fishes reptiles, land snail
O
I s
NH, HN oN,
te a
NH; O=C IY
Ammonia | Urea Uric acid

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Nature of Excretory Products in Relation to Habitats

Ammoniais very toxic and dissolves quickly in body fluids. Thus, it must be keptin low concentration
in the body. To maintain its low concentration below that of body requires large volume of water
also to eliminate it in urine as it is produced. This is possible in an hypotonic environment. Therefore,
ammonia kept as the excretory product of the animals inhabiting hypotonic (e.g. fresh water)
environment. About 500 ml water is needed to excrete lg of ammonia nitrogen.

Ammonia + cos

Ammonia
Citrulline Second nitrogen of urea
Ornithine it ii Argininosuccinate

= Arginine
Arginase

Urea

Fig 15.6: Metabolic pathways in urea cycle

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

In restricted supply of water, ammonia cannot be kept as excretory product, the other alternative
is to change it into less toxic substance such as urea. Urea requires only 50 ml of water for its lg
of nitrogen removal. Here excretory nitrogen is metabolically converted into urea by urea cycle
(Fig. 15.6) in the animals inhabiting environment with restricted supply of water e.g. terrestrial
mammals.

Aimals inhabiting environment with acute shortage of water supply require an excretory product
which can be excreted with minimum amount of water. Only 1ml water is required to eliminate lg
of nitrogen in the form of uric acid. Therefore the reptiles and birds that inhabit arid environment,
excrete uric acid as excretory product. Animals excreting ammonia, urea .and uric acid are called
as ammonotelic, ureotelic and uricotelic respectively. Ureotely and uricotely are evolutionary
adaptations of nitrogenous waste in their habitats. Animals have adapted not only the chemical
nature of excretory products but also the various adaptations have been obtained to provide
diversity in excretory structures. The main representative models are described below:

EXCRETION IN REPRESENTATIVE ANIMALS

Excretion in Hydra
Hydra, a cnidarian, does not have specialized excretory structures. In it waste products simply
diffuse into the isosmotic surroundings.

Excretion in Planaria

Planaria the animals of the group of flatworms have simple tubular excretory system called
protonephridium. A protonephridium is a network of closed tubules without internal openings.
Tubular system is spread throughout the body and branches are capped by a cellular setup termed
as flame cell. Each flame cell has a tuft of cilia, whose beating propels interstitial fluid into the
tubular system (The beating of cilia looks like a flickering flame, therefore these cells are termed
flame cells). The tubular system is drained into excretory ducts, which open to the exterior through
several nephridiopores (Fig. 15.7).

Fresh water flatworms excrete very dilute urine. The parasitic flatworms, which are isotonic to the
host environment mainly function in disposing nitrogenous wastes.

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Flame cells

Cytoplasm

Cilia ("flame")
Prolonephiricial

Movement of

interstitial
fluid

Fxcretory
duct

Excretory
duct

(Ss) cranerre (b) Portion of excretory organ

Fig.15.7. Excretory system in Planaria

Excretion in Earthworm

Earthwormisanidealexampleofanothertypeoftubularexcretorysystemcalledasmetanephridium.
Each segment of earthworm has a pair of metanephridia. This system has an internal ciliated
opening the nephrostome immersed in coelomic fluid and enveloped by a network of capillaries.
Nephrostome collects coelomic fluid. As fluid moves along the tubule, epithelium reabsorbs salt
from the lumen and sends to blood vessels surrounding the nephridium. The left over appears as
urine containing nitrogenous waste (Fig. 15.8).

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Collectiing tubule

Caplillary network

Nephridiostome

Nephridiopore

fig: 15.8: Excretory system in earthworm

Excretion in Cockroach

Terrestrial arthropods particularly in the insects, the excretory structures are adapted to collect
excretory products from hemolymph in sinuses through suspended tubular structures called
Malpighian tubules. These Malpighian tubules remove nitrogenous waste from the hemolymph.
These are the only excretory structures in animal kingdom that are associated with digestive tract.
The epithelial lining of the tubules transports solutes including salts and nitrogenous waste from
haemolymph into tubules lumen. Fluid then passes to hind gut into the rectum. Rectum reabsorbs
most of the salts and water, thus nitrogenous wastes are excreted as solid excreta, in the form of

uric acid crystals along the feces.

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

This kind of adaptation in excretion is the success of these animals on land with acute shortage of
water (Fig. 15.9)

Digestive tract

Midgut Malpighian
(stomach) tubules

Fig. 15.9 Excretory system in insect

EXCRETION IN VERTEBRATES

The ancestors of vertebrates, the invertebrate chordates have segmentally arranged excretory
structures throughout the body like the metanephridia in earthworm. This character is well
represented in the primitive vertebrate hagfishes which have kidneys with segmentally arranged
tubules. However, the contrasting developments proceeded in evolution in other vertebrates
with the appearance of kidneys. Kidneys contain numerous tubules, not arranged segmentally,
closely associated with dense network of capillaries. The basic functional structure in the kidneys
is nephron.

Excretion in Human

Normal Mechanisms : Considering the chemical basis of life and its sustainability on metabolic
pathways, the generation of wastes is primarily done at metabolic level and these are called
metabolic wastes.

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

These include urea, produced from the metabolism of amino acids; creatinine, produced from
muscle creatine; uric acid, from nucleic acids; bilirubin, end products of haemoglobin breakdown
and metabolites of various hormones.

Metabolic wastes also include the toxins produced within the body and ingested into the body such
as pesticides, drugs and food additives. The presence of wastes in the body causes serious hazards,
thus are eliminated by excretory system.

Excretory Organs:

Liver and kidneys are the primary structure for eliminating waste products.

Liver is the central station of metabolism and consequently the body's central metabolic clearing
house. Due to this characteristic, liver functions are pivotal to homeostasis and involve interaction
with most of body’s organs systems. Liver supports the excretory role of the kidney by detoxifying
many chemical poisons and produce ammonia, urea and uric acids from the nitrogen of amino
acids. Removal of salts with water by the sweat glands and of sebum by sebaceous glands seems
to be excretory in nature. The removal of water and salts from sweat glands is for the purpose of
thermoregulation and of sebum on the skin is for protection against microorganism. Therefore
in context of definition of excretion, skin may not be considered as an excretory organ. Among
the various nitrogenous wastes described earlier, urea is the principal excretory product and liver
form it from the waste nitrogen. The metabolic pathways involved in the production of urea are
termed as urea cycle. Two ammonia and one carbon dioxide molecules are shunted into the
cycle to generate one molecule of urea. One ammonia molecule combines with carbon dioxide
and already available precursor from previous cycle ornithine to form citrulline, subsequently
another ammonia combines to form arginine. The arginine is split by arginase to form urea and
the precursor ornithine for next cycle (Fig. 15.6).

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Table 15.1. Major homeostatic functions of the liver

Functions Major effects on homeostasis

Synthesis: Nitrogenous wastes: NH,, urea, uric Supports kidney in waste disposal

acid

Plasma proteins: like a) prothrombin, fibrinogen a) Blood clotting b) maintain osmotic balance of

b) albumin etc. blood

Bile Emulsifies fats in small intestine

Lipids, cholesterol, lipoproteins Regulate blood chemistry, store energy and help
to maintain cell membranes

Storage: lron Oxygenation of tissues as constituent of
haemoglobin

Glycogen Energy reserves

Conversion: Excess glucose in bloodto glycogen, Energy storage and use
lactic, acid to glycogen and stored glycogen to
glucose

Recyclings: Contents of old red blood cells (e.g., Oxygenation of tissue

iron and other constitution of haemoglobin)
Detoxification: Many harmful chemicals (e.g., Assist kidney in toxin disposal

food additives, pesticides, drugs etc)

Liver is not only involved in the synthesis of nitrogenous wastes to assist kidney in their disposal,
but also has numerous crucial functions of homeostasis importance. These functions belong to
synthesis, storage, conversion, recycling and detoxification categories (Table 15.1).

Urea is detoxified form of ammonia in urea cycle, which can be retained in the body in greater
amounts than ammonia and can be eliminated with 1/10 quantity of water as compared to
ammonia.

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Urinary System

A pair of kidneys consists of millions of functional units, nephrons. The nephrons have extensive
blood supply via the renal arteries, which leave each kidney via the renal vein. The function of
kidney and blood in clearing wastes is very evident from the fact that weight of kidneys accounts for
less than 1% of the total body weight while receive 20% of blood supplied with each cardiac beat.
Following filtration of blood and further processing through tubular system urine is collected in a
central cavity of the kidney, pelvis. Urine leaves the kidney through a duct ureter. The ureters of
both the kidneys drain into urinary bladder through ureteral orifice. Urine leaves the body, during
urination, from the bladder through a tube called the urethra, which empties near the vagina in
females or through the penis in males. Sphincter muscles near the junction of the urethra and the
bladder control the urine in bladder (Fig. 15.10).

Animation 15.4: Urinary System
Source and Credit: (Renal Patholog

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Left renal
Capsule artery
Right renal vei
Hilus
Renal pelvis
Lett
Inferior vena cave kidney
Ureteral orifices
Right and left
6. ureters
- Urinary
* A bladder
’ * '
Urethra
External

urethral onfice

Fig. 15.10. Human urinary system

Nephron: The functional units, nephrons, in human kidneys are arranged along two distinct regions,
an outer cortex and an inner medulla. The nephrons arranged along the cortex are called as
cortical, however, those arranged along the border of cortex and medulla with their tubular system
looping deep in inner medulla are juxtamedullary nephrons These juxtamedullary nephrons are
specifically instrumental in the production of concentrated urine (Fig. 15.11).

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

In each nephron inner end forms a cup-shaped swelling, called Bowman's capsule and it is
around a ball of capillaries called glomerulus. Glomerulus circulates blood through capsule as it
arrives through afferent arteriole and leaves the capsule by efferent arteriole. The blood vessel
subdivides again into another network of capillaries, the peritubular capillaries. Bowman capsule
continues as extensively convoluted proximal tubule, loop of Henle and the distal tubule, which
empties into collecting tubules. The collecting tubules open into pelvis. The filtrate from glomerulus
passes through these structures and is processed ultimately for urine formation. The peritubular
capillaries intermingle with proximal and distal tubules of the nephron. In juxtamedullary nephrons
additional capillaries extend down to from a loop of vessels, vasa recta.

Capillaries

Arteriole

Venule

Renal pyramid
Renal vein

Renal artery

Renal pelvis
Medulla
Ureter
Renal fascia and cortex Cortex

Fig. 15.11. The structure of a kidney

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Filtration: Blood passing through glomerulus is filtered into Bowman's capsule. It is specifically
filtered here, unlike at the other parts of the vessels, because glomerulus walls are porous, and
the fraction of the blood pressure reaching here provides the filtration pressure. The filtrate
appearing in Bowmans capsule is called as glomerular filtrate, which contains numerous useful
substances such as glucose, amino acids, salts etc in aqueous solution.

Reabsorption: All the useful constituents of the glomerular filterate are reabsorbed in proximal
tubules and when filtrate leaves proximal tubules, it mostly contains nitrogenous wastes.

Secretion: The tubular epithelium also secretes substances into the lumen, this secretion is very
selective and is mainly of hydrogen ions to balance pH value of the filtrate passing through the
tubule.

Concentration of Excretory Products

In restricted supply of water, the conservation of water is the principal function of the body. This is
done by concentration of the filtrate by counter current and hormonal mechanisms. In the sufficient
or excess supply of water, reabsorption of water from the filtrate is reduced, specifically due to
inhibition of release of antidiuretic hormone in the presence of hyposomotic body fluids.

The reduction in reabsorption causes large volumes of diluted urine. Mammalian kidney including
human is adapted to conserve water by over 99.5% reabsorption of glomerular filtrate.

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Bowman's ca le
»—\ Clemens Proximal tubule
tle

Afferent arteriole

from renal
artery Peritubular
Efferent arteriole caplillaries
from glamerulus Distal
tubule
Branch of
renal vein
Collecting

Descendin
Loop | jimb 9
of
anare Ascending
limb
Vasa —
recta

Fig:15.72. a nephron with vascular supply

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

The interstitial fluid of the kidney is gradually concentrated from cortical to medullary part, thus inner
medulla is highly concentrated with the presence of urea and through a mechanism of counter-
current multiplier. This mechanism causes gradual osmotic outflow of water from the filtrate
back to kidney as it passes downward in the descending loop of Henle. Furthermore, ascending
loop of Henle does not allow outflow of water from its filtrate, instead actively transport Na ions
into kidney interstitium to sustain its high concentration.

Hormones: The active uptake of sodium in the ascending limb or thick loop of Henle is promoted
by the action of aldosterone, the hormone secreted from adrenal cortex. The other site in the
nephron, where reabsorption of water takes place is collecting tubules. ADH released from posterior
pituitary lobe acts to actively transport water from filtrate in Distal tubules and collecting tubules
back to kidney.

Kidney as Osmoregulatory Organ

The production of varied concentrations of urine depending on the availability of water exhibits
clearly that kidney functions as an osmoregulatory organ along its excretory role of nitrogenous
wastes.

Animation 15.5: Kidney As Osmoregulatory Organ
Source and Credit: |B

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Kidney Problems and Cures

Unusual situations may arise in the function of kidney by factors originating within kidney or
outside. These cause serious kidney diseases.

Kidney Stones: Stony materials are found in the kidney and these cause urinary obstruction and
are generally complicated by infections. These stones have specified chemical nature. These are
formed in metabolic disease, hypercalcemia i.e. high level of circulating calcium in blood because
of other diseases. Hyperoxaluria i.e. higher blood level of oxalates is other contributing factor in
the formation of calcium oxalate stones. Oxalates are present in green vegetables and tomatoes
therefore may be the source of hyperoxaluria. The incidence of calcium oxalate type stones are
70% of all the kidney stones. The incidence of other types of stones of calcium phosphate and of
uric acid is 15% and 10% respectively. These salts are precipitated out during urine formation and
accumulate later to form stone (Fig. 15.13).

Animation 15.6: Kidney Problems

@5)

Fig. 15.13. The kidney stones: Stone of phosphates are formed and trapped in the pelvis area

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Lithotripsy: The kidney stones have been removed by kidney surgery. Presently lithotripsy is used
for non-surgical removal of kidney stone. It is the technique used to break up stones that form in
the kidney, ureter or gall bladder. There are several ways to do it, although the most common is
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. High concentrations of X-ray or ultrasound are directed from
a machine outside the body to the stone inside. The shock waves break the stone in tiny pieces or
into sand, which are passed out of the body in urine.

Renal Failure: Various factors of pathological and chemical nature may progressively destroy the
nephron, particularly its glomerular part. This results in increase in the plasma level of urea and
other nitrogenous wastes. The rise in urea causes complications of increase in blood pressure and
anemia etc.

Dialysis : In chronic renal failure, the function of the kidney is completely lost and is unable to
remove nitrogenous waste. To remove nitrogenous waste, particularly the urea, the blood of the
patient is treated through dialysis. It cleans the blood either by passing it through an artificial
kidney or by filtering it within the abdomen. The wastes and excess water are removed during the
treatment as is done by the healthy kidneys.

There are two types of dialysis: hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.
Hemodialysis means ‘cleaning the blood’. In this procedure blood is circulated through a machine
which contains a dialyzer also called an artificial kidney. Dialyzer has two spaces separated by
thin membrane. Blood passes from one side of the membrane and dialysis fluid on the other. The
wastes and excess water pass from the blood through the membrane into the dialysis fluid.
Peritoneal dialysis work on the same principle except that abdomen has a peritoneal cavity, lined
by a thin epithelium called peritoneum. Peritoneal cavity is filled with dialysis fluid that enters the
body through a catheter. Excess water and wastes pass through the peritoneum into the dialysis
fluid. This process is repeated several times a day. Dialyzer is a kidney machine that works on the
same principle as in a kidney for removal of nitrogenous wastes and excess water from the blood.
It is used after kidney failure and dialysis is done again and again until a matching donor's kidney
is transplanted.
Kidney Transplant: Dialysis may be used as a temporary measure. In high degree renal failure also
called as uremia or end-stage renal disease, the dialysis can not be done hence thus the surgical
transplantation of a matching donor kidney is the only option left for as the permanent treatment.

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

THERMOREGULATION

Control systems operate in organisms to cope with environmental stresses including temperature
extremes.
Adaptations in Plants to Low and High Temperature

High Temperature : High temperature denatures the enzymes and damages the metabolism,
therefore, it harms or kills the plants. Plants use evaporative cooling to manage with high
temperature. Hot and dry weather, however, causes water deficiency resulting in closing of stomata,
thus plants suffer in such conditions. Most plants have adapted to survive in heat stress as the
plants of temperate regions face the stress of 40°C and above temperature. The cells of these
plants synthesize large quantities of special proteins called heat-shock proteins. These proteins
embrace enzymes and other proteins thus help to prevent denaturation.

Low Temperature : In low temperature the fluidity of the cell membrane is altered, because lipids
of the membrane become locked into crystalline structures, which affects the transport of the
solutes. The structure of the membrane proteins is also affected. Plants respond to cold stress by
increasing proportion of unsaturated fatty acids, which help membrane to maintain structure at
low temperature by preventing crystal formation. This adaptation requires time because of this
reason rapid chilling of plants is more stressful than gradual drop in air temperature.

Freezing temperature causes ice crystal formation. The confinement of ice formation around cell
wall does not affect as badly and plants survive, however, formation of ice crystals within protoplasm
perforates membranes and organelles hence killing the cells. The plants native to cold region such
as oaks, maples, roses and other plants have adapted to bring changes in solutes composition of
the cells, which causes cytosol to super cool without ice formation, although ice crystals may form
in the cell walls.

MECHANISMS IN ANIMALS
Body Heat, Heat Gain and Loss

Temperature of an animal depends upon the rate of change of body heat which in turn depends
on rate of heat production through metabolic processes and the rate of external heat gain and
rate of heat loss. This transfer of heat between an animal and its environment is done in numerous
ways. Principally, infrared thermal radiation and direct and reflected sunlight transfer heat into the
animal; whereas radiation and evaporation transfer heat out to the environment.

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Temperature Classification of Animals

Animals deal with variation in the thermal characteristics of their environment. There are animals
in which body temperature tends to fluctuate more or less with ambient temperature where air or
water temperatures are changed, these are poikilotherms, all invertebrates, fish, amphibians and
reptiles are considered in this category. The other exposed to changing air or water temperature
maintain their body temperature are the homeotherms and include birds and mammals. Several
difficulties arise with this terminology with studies. It is observed that deep sea fishes maintain
their body temperature due to the constant natural surroundings and lizards regulate their body
temperature; and in contrast numerous birds and mammals vary their body temperature.
Therefore, amore widely applicable temperature classification scheme is based on the source of heat
production. According to this animals that generate their own body heat through heat production
as by-product during metabolism are endotherms include flying insects, some fishes, birds and
mammals. Ectotherm is the other type, which produce metabolic heat at low level and that is also
exchanged quickly with the environment, however, absorb heat from their surroundings. Most
invertebrates, fish, amphibians and reptiles are in this category. A third category, heterotherms is
of those animals who are capable of varying degrees of endothermic heat production but generally
do not regulate their body temperature within a narrow range e.g. bats, humming bird etc.

Regulation of Heat Exchange between Animals and Environment

Animals use different mechanism for such regulation and these are of structural, physiological and
behavioral nature.

Structural Adaptations: These may be long term changes in sub dermal fatty layer insulation and
pelage. The presence of sweat glands and lungs modified for panting.

Behavioral Adaptations: These include moving of the animal to an environment where heat
exchange between these is minimal e.g. ground squirrels move to burrows in midday heat and
lizards bask in sun to gain heat. Animals also control the amount of surface area available for heat
exchange by adjusting their postures.

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

THERMOREGULATION IN MAMMALS (HUMAN)

Regulatory Strategies

Mammals including human maintain their high body temperature within a narrow range of about
36-38 °C because of their endothermic characteristics. The origin of endothermy in birds and
mammals have provided the opportunity to keep high metabolic rate and availability of energy
round the clock, thus has acquired greater ability to adaptations and has assisted in much of their
wider diversity and distribution in diversified regions of the earth.

These regulate the rate of metabolic heat production, balancing it with the rate at which they
gain or lose heat from the surroundings. The rate of heat production is increased by increased
muscle contraction by movements or shivering so called as shivering thermogenesis. Also
hormones trigger the heat production as do thyroid hormones and are termed as non-shivering
thermogenesis. Some mammals possess brown fat, which is specialized for rapid heat production.
In overproduction of heat it is dissipated through exposed surfaces by increasing blood flow or
the evaporative cooling. In mammals, it is observed that skin has been adapted as the organ of
thermoregulation. (Fig. 15.14)

In Cold Temperature : Mammals have various mechanisms that regulate heat exchange with
their environment. Vasodilation and vasoconstriction effect heat exchange and may contribute to
regional temperature differences with in an animal. On a cool day a human's temperature may
be several degrees lower in the arms and legs than in the trunk, where the most vital glands are
situated. Most land mammals respond to cold by raising their furs thereby trapping the thicker
layer of still air and it acts as good insulator between animal skin and the surroundings. Human
mostly rely on a layer of fat just insulating beneath the skin as insulating material against heat loss.
Similarly marine mammals such as whales and seals inhabit much colder water than their body
temperature, have a very thick layer of insulating fat called as blubber just under the skin.

skin blood
wossols dilate:
Capillaries fill with

temperature (0.g.,
oxorciging or in

suuroundings)

Skin blood wossals
Cond trict diverting blood.
trom akin te deeper
tsues and redusiing
loss from skin aurface

Fig. 15.14 The thermostat function of the hypothalamus and feed back control mechanisms in human
thermoregulation.

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

in Warm Temperature : Marine mammals dispose off their excess heat into warm seas by large
number of blood vessels in the outer layer of the skin. This dissipates the heat from the skin
surface. In terrestrial mammals, in contrast is the mechanism of evaporative cooling. The sweat
gland activity and the evaporative cooling is the one of the major temperature reducing strategies.
Panting, the evaporative cooling in the respiratory tract, is’‘the other mechanism as represented in
the dogs. Bats etc use saliva and urine for evaporative cooling.

Thermostat Function and Feedback Controls in Human

The body temperature regulation in humans is based on complex homeostatic systems facilitated
by feedback mechanisms. The homeostatic thermostat is present in the hypothalamus, a brain
part. It responds to the changes in the temperature above and below a set point which is 37°C.

In case of increase in temperature above the set point, certain warm temperature sensitive
thermoreceptors in skin, hypothalamus and other parts of nervous systems send the signals to the
system that increase the blood flow to the skin and also cause sweat gland activation and the sweat
is evaporated for the cooling.

In cold temperature, the cold receptors send the impulses to hypothalamus to inhibit heat loss
mechanisms and activate the heat conservation mechanisms. This includes constriction of superficial
blood vessels and stimulating shivering and non shivering mechanisms.

Temperature in fever (Pyrexia)

In bacterial and viral infections mainly, leukocytes increase in number. These pathogens and
the blood cells produce chemicals called as pyrogens. Pyrogens displace the set point of
hypothalamus above the normal point of 37° C. Fever or high temperature helps in stimulating
.the protective mechanisms against the pathogens

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Q.2. Fill in the blank.

(i) _ __is the ability of an organism to regulate its fluid contents.

(ii) The detoxification of ammonia to _ requires the precursor of
ornithine.

(iii) In kidney nephron is closely associated with network of__ _

(iv) In insects salt and water reabsorption takes places inthe__ _

(v) The antidiuretic hormone act on __ to promote reabsorption of water
in vertebrate nephron.

(vi) The nephrons arranged along the border of cortex and medulla, with tubular system looping
deep in the inner medulla, are called _
nephrons.

(vii) The non surgical procedure of removing kidney stone is termed as

(vill) ==~=———s is the homeostatic thermostat in human.

Q.3. Short questions

(i) Differentiate between osmoconformers and osmoregulators.

(ii) Define anhydrobiosis with an example.

(iii) Why does filtration takes place only at glomeruli part of nephron and nowhere else?

(vi) Mention two metabolic altered states that generally (70%) cause kidney stone formation.
(v) What is a renal failure?

(vi) Account one each main adaptation in plants to high and low temperatures.

@)

15. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab

Q.4. Extensive questions

(i) | Discuss nature of excretory products in animal to various habitats, specifically in association
of water availability.

(ii) Account the excretory system in earthworm.
(iii) Highlight the role of liver as an excretory organ.

(vi) Draw a labeled diagram of a vertebrate nephron with all blood supply. State the function of
each part.

(v) Describe thermoregulatory strategies in mammals including human in cold temperature.

(vi) Discuss excretion in plants.

(vii) Discuss some kidney problems with their cures.

CHAPTER

ex Support And
Movements

Animation 16 : Support and movement

ource & Credit: Wikispaces

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
CONCEPT AND NEED

Animals and plants show a variety of physical and biochemical activities. The main difference
between plants and animals is in their locomotion; animals show movement while plants do not.

Both plants and animals need support against gravity. The collenchymatous cells in plants give
Support to the baby plants and sclerenchymatous cells to the adult plants. In animals muscles,
cartilage and bones provide support. They enable them to move towards food, away from danger
and for shelter.

SUPPORT IN PLANTS

You are familiar with the parts of plant like stem, root, leaves etc. One of the most important
functions of the stem is to give support and acts as a supply line between root and aerial parts of
the plant. In the stem, the function of support is shared among several types of cells (Fig 16.1).

a) Parenchyma cells:

The tissues which provide support to the plant are parencyhma. parenchyma cells of epidermis,
cortex and pith take in water by osmosis. Thus an internal hydrostatic pressure called turgor
pressure, keeps them rigid and resistant to bending. If they loose turgidity, herbaceous stem wilts.
The turgor pressure is extremely important to maintain the turgidity in plants.

The collenchyma cell in cortex and highly lignified schlerencyma cells in xylem tissues,give support
to the plants. In most terrestrial plants, the major mechanical stress is imposed by wind, so that
stem must be able to resist bending. The vascular bundles containing the xylem are tough and
inextensible to perform the same function as steel rods in reinforced concrete. This arrangement
as a ring within the stem provides very effective resistance to wind stress, and weight bearing
ability.

In the stem of some plants, for example, sunflower, the vascular bundles are strengthened by
additional sclerenchyma fibers, which form bundle cap.

The loss of water due to ex-osmosis from plant cells causes plant or its parts to wilt. How plant cell
maintains turgor pressure is an important phenomenon.

Middle (b}) Collenchyma
larnella

tercelluler

Sap vacoule
Nucleus

Cytoplasm

(c) Sclerenchyma_ fibres

Fig. 16.1 Specialized plants cells

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Turgor pressure is generated by high osmotic pressure of the cell vacuole. The membrane that
bounds vacuole, is called tonoplast which contains a number of active transport systems that pump
ions into the vacuole or vacuolar compartments despite the higher concentration than that of the
extracellular fluid. Because of the higher ionic concentration, water enters the vacuole and hence
provides turgidity, mechanical support, to soft tissues of plant. The tissues which provide support
to the plants are:

(b) Sclerenchyma Cells

They have thick secondary cell walls usually impregnated with lignin, an organic substance that
makes the walls tough and hard. Most of the sclerenchyma cells are non-living. Their primary
function is to provide support to the plant parts.

There are three types of sclerenchymatous cells.

(i) Fibers (Tracheids): These are long and cylindrical and they may exist as solid bundles in xylem
or as bundle caps.

(ii) Sclereides: These are shorter than fibers and are found in seed coats and nut shells and
provide protection.

(iii) Vessels (Tracheae): Long tubular structures, join end to end to form long water conducting
pipe in xylem.

(c) Collenchyma Cells

Collenchyma cells have protoplasts and usually lack secondary walls. They have angular thickening
in their primary walls. They are usually grouped in strands or cylinders. Collenchyma cells provide
Support to young herbaceous parts of the plant. Young stems, for instance, often have a cylinder
of collenchyma just below their surface. Collenchyma cells are elastic, elongate with the growth of
stems and leaves.

Significance of Secondary Growth
Stem and root often begin to thicken after their apical meristem has produced embryonic or primary
tissue. An increase in plant girth due to vascular cambium and cork cambium is called secondary

growth. The result of secondary growth is most evident in woody perennial plants like trees, shrubs
and vine. Secondary growth occurs due to cell division in : (i) Vascular cambium (ii) Cork cambium.

©

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Vascular cambium first appears as a cylinder of actively dividing cells between primary xylem and
primary phloem. Vascular cambium gives rise to two new tissues, one is the secondary xylem next
to the inner surface of the vascular cambium, the other is the secondary phloem appearing outer
to the vascular cambium.

The secondary xylem causes most of the increase in stem thickness. Over the years a woody stem
gets thicker and thicker as its vascular cambium produces layer upon layer of secondary xylem.
These layers are visible as rings. Since one growth ring is formed in one year, a count of the rings
at the base of trunk indicates the age of a tree at the time it was cut.

In most trees, the conduction of water and dissolved substances by secondary xylem become
limited to the outer or younger portion of that tissue. As trees grow older only few annual growth
rings are active in conduction at one time. The active portion is called sap wood. The inactive non-
conducting wood is called heartwood.

In most species, the heartwood accumulates a variety of chemicals such as resins, oils, gums and
tannins. These provide a resistance to decay and insect attack, for example, in red cedar and
conifers.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Bark
cork
cork cambium
summer wood —__—
Spring wood ———___
Sap wood Wood
Cork Heart wood annual ring

secondary
xylem

primary xylem . Phioem
fom big

Cork

Vascular
cambium

Heart wood
Fig. 16.2 Dicot woody stem

©)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Another important function of the cambium is to form callus or wood tissue on or over the wound,
soft parenchymatous tissues are rapidly formed on or below the damaged surface of stems and
roots. Callus also unites the branches during budding and grafting.

MOVEMENTS IN PLANTS

Organisms respond to the external as well as internal stimuli. Animals move in response to
external stimuli; similarly plants also show movements. Animals change their location in response
to stimulus. Plants are fixed therefore, they change their growth pattern.

Types of Movements

There are two types of movements:

1. Autonomic movements 2. Paratonic movements.
Autonomic movements are spontaneous movements due to internal causes whereas paratonic
movements are due to external causes.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
1. Autonomic movements : Autonomic movements are of three types:
(i) Tactic movements (ii) Turgor movements (iii) Growth movements.

(i) Tactic Movements : These are the movements of an entire cell or organism i.e. locomotion
due to internal stimulus. The tactic movement may be positive if it is towards the stimulus or
negative if it is away from the stimulus. Tactic movements are the movements of locomotion; they
are further classified on the basis of the nature of the stimulus, (a) Phototactic movement: It is
a movement in response to stimulus of light. The movement may be towards the source of light
(positive) or away from the source of light (negative). The best example of positive tactic movement
is the passive movement of chloroplast due to cyclosis. This movement helps the chloroplast to
absorb maximum light for CO, fixation. The light intensity and direction both affect the intra cellular
distribution of chloroplasts. (b) Chemotactic movement : The movement in response to stimulus
of chemicals is called chemotactic movement. The movements shown by sperms of liver-worts,
mosses, ferns towards archegonia in response to stimulus of nucleic acid released by the ovum is
one such example.

(ii) Turgor Movements : Turgor movement is due to differential changes in turgor and size
of cells as a result of gain or loss of water. Rapid movements of leaflets in “touch-me-not” plant
and sleep movements of the plants fall under this category of movements, (a) Sleep movements:
Bean plants and some members of legume family lower their leaves in the evening and raise them
in the morning. These are known as sleep movements. These sleeping movements are due to
daily changes in turgor pressure in the pulvinus. The place of attachment of leaf with the shoot,
pulvinus, is swollen portion of the petiole composed of parenchymatous cells with relatively large
inter cellular spaces and central strand of vascular tissues.

When turgor pressure on the lower side of pulvinus increases the leaves rise and become horizontal.
When turgor pressure decreases on the lower side of pulvinus, the leaves lower and go to “sleeping”
position, (6) Rapid movement of leaflets : When the compound leaf of sensitive plant Mimosa
is touched, the leaflets fold together. This response takes a second or two resulting from rapid
loss of turgor by the cells in pulvinus at the base of each leaflet. The investigation has shown that
potassium (K’*) ions move first, which causes water to leave the cell by exosmosis. It takes about ten
minutes to regain the turgor and restore the internal turgidity of leaf

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

(iii) Growth Movements : Growth movements are due to unequal growth on two sides of plant
organs like stem, root, tendrils, buds etc. There are three types of growth movements, (a) Epinasty
: It is shown by leaves, petals etc. The upper surface of leaf in bud condition shows more growth
as compared with the lower surface. This leads to opening of buds, (6b) Hyponasty: If growth in
the lower surface of the leaf in bud condition is more than that of the upper surface then the bud
will remain closed, (c) Nutation : The growing tip of young stem moves in a zig-zag fashion due to
alternate changes in growth on opposite sides of the apex. This mode of growth is called nutation.
2. Paratonic Movements : These movements are due to external causes. These are of following
types.

(a) Tropic Movements : The word tropic is derived from Greek word ‘Tropos’ meaning ‘turn’. It
is the movement in curvature of whole organ towards or away from stimuli such as light, gravity,
and touch. Following are common tropic movements: (i) Phototropism : It is the movement of
part of plant, in response to stimulus of light and is caused by the differential growth of part of a
plant like stem or root, (ii) Thigmotropism : It is the movement in response to stimulus of touch,
for example climbing vines. When they come in contact with some solid object, the growth on the
opposite side of contact increases and the tendril coils around the support, (iii) Chemotropism :
The movement in response to some chemicals is called chemotropism. The hyphae of fungi are
chemotropic. (iv) Hydrotropism : The movement of plant parts in response to stimulus of water is
called hydrotropism. The growth of roots toward water is due to positive hydrotropism and growth
of shoot away from water is negatively hydrotropic. (v) Geotropism : It is the response to gravity.
Roots display positive geotropism and shoots negative geotropism.

(b) Nastic Movements: These are the non-directional movements of parts of plant in response
to external stimuli. These are of two types: (i) Nyctinasty : The nyctinastic movements are shown by
the organs in response to external stimuli leading to differential growth. These are due to turgor and
growth changes. It may be of two types: (a) Photonasty : The principal stimulus is the photoperiod.
The flowers open and close due to light intensity. (b) Thermonasty : It is due to temperature. The
flowers of tulip close at night because of rapid growth in the lower side by upward and inward
bending of the petals.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

(ii) Haptonastic movements occur in response to contact. Examples include the action of the Venus
fly trap.

Role of Plant Growth Substances In Plant Movement

Plants do not move from one place to other like animals. However, their organs show movements,
which are controlled by hormones. Auxins play major role in phototropism. It is believed that
unequal distribution of auxin indole acetic acid (| A A) in the coleoptiles stumps, produces unequal
cell enlargement, causing a bend in the organ towards source of light.

Auxins are also responsible for positive gravitropism of roots and negative geotropism of stems.
Auxins inhibit the growth of root cells. The cells of the upper surface, therefore elongate and the
root curves downward. Auxins on the other hand, stimulate the growth of the stem cells. The cells
of the lower surface, elongate and stem curves upward. Nastic movements are due to some balance
or ratio between growth inhibitors (abscisins) and growth stimulators (gibberellins). However, it
has been observed that epinasty is due to auxins and hyponasty due to gibberellins.

SUPPORT AND MOVEMENTS IN ANIMALS

The skeleton is tough and rigid framework of the body of animals which provides protection, shape
and support to the body organs. It is composed of inorganic or organic substances or both. In
protozoa it is secreted by a single cell, whereas in multicellular animals it is composed of specialized
cells. There are three main types of skeleton in animals, hydrostatic skeleton, exoskeleton and
endoskeleton.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

1. Hydrostatic Skeleton

In animals thatlack a hard skeleton, a fluid filled gastrovascular cavity or coelom can act as hydrostatic
skeleton. Hydrostatic skeleton provides support and resistance to the contraction of muscles so
that motility results. It is found in cnidarians, annelids and other soft-bodied invertebrates.

The sea anemone has hydrostatic skeleton. Its cavity is filled with sea water to extend its body and
tentacles. The sea anemone closes its mouth and constricts its muscle fibers that are arranged in
circles around its body. The contraction of these circular muscles puts pressure on the liquid in
body cavity and that pressure forces the body to maintain upright stature.

In earthworm, the hydrostatic skeleton consists of fluid-filled compartments separated by septa.
Contraction of circular muscle causes compartments to elongate and contraction of longitudinal
muscle causes a compartment to shorten. Alternating waves of elongation and contraction move
the earthworm through the soil, aided by paired setae in each segment.

2. Exoskeleton

An exoskeleton is hardened outer covering to which internal muscles are attached. The exoskeleton
is inert and non-living. It is secreted by the ectoderm in animal cells. It is composed of two layers.
The epicuticle is the outer most layer. Because it is made up of waxy lipoprotein, it is impermeable
to water and serves as a barrier to microorganisms in insects. The bulk of exoskeleton is below the
epicuticle and is called the procuticle.Procuticle consists of an outerlayer exocuticle and inner layer
of endocuticle. The procuticle is composed of chitin, tough, leathery, polysaccharide and several
kinds of protein. It is further hardened by sclerotization and sometimes by impregnation with
calcium carbonate.

The simplest example of an exoskeleton is the shell of mollusca, which generally consists of just
one or two pieces. Some marine bivalvia and snail have shell composed of crystals of calcium
carbonate. The shell of land snail generally lacks the hard minerals and are much lighter. Molluscan
Shell can grow as the animal grows and growth rings are apparent on the shell. The soft parts of the
molluscan body have a hydrostatic skeleton as well.

The most complex exoskeleton is found among the arthropods. The arthropods have made a
variety of adaptations to allow them to live and grow within their exoskeleton. The invagination of
exoskeleton forms firm ridges and bars for muscle attachment. Another modification of exoskeleton
is the formation of joints. The exoskeleton are thin, soft and flexible at joints, consequently joint
move very easily. Other modifications of exoskeleton include sensory receptors called sensilla that
are inthe form of bristles, and lenses and the modification of the exoskeleton that permits gaseous

exchange. @

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

The exoskeleton in arthropoda protects the animals against their enemies and rough environment.
It also protects them from drying.

However, it has one disadvantage and that is animals cannot grow larger. The animal, therefore,
needs to shed its exoskeleton periodically and replace it with one of the larger size. This process is
known as “ecdysis or moulting.”

Ecdysis is divided into four stages:

1. Enzymes, secreted from hypodermal glands, begin digesting the old endocuticle. This digestion
separates hypodermis and the exoskeleton.

2. The old exoskeleton is split and pores are formed.

. The digestion of endocuticle is followed by secretion of new procuticle and epicuticle.

4. Finally, the new exoskeleton is hardened by deposition of calcium carbonate. During the
hardening process, the arthropod is vulnerable to predators and remains hidden. All these
changes are controlled by the nervous system and the hormone ecdysone.

Some major functions of the skeletal system are as follows:

WW

(i) Support and shape: Bones support soft tissues and serve as attachment sites for most muscles
and provide shape to the body.

(ii) Protection: Bones protect critical internal organs, such as brain, spinal cord, heart and lungs.
(iii) Movement: Skeletal muscles attached to the bones help in moving the body.

(iv) Mineral homeostasis: Bones serve as store for calcium, phosphorus, sodium and potassium.
Through negative feedback mechanisms, bones can release or take up minerals to maintain
homeostasis.

(v) Blood cell production: Red and white blood cells are produced in bone marrow, a connective
tissue found within certain bones.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

3. Endoskeleton

The endoskeleton is primarily made up of two types of tissues, bones and cartilage. Both bones
and cartilage are types of rigid connective tissue. Both consists of living cells embedded in the
matrix of protein called collagen.

Bone : It is the most rigid form of connective tissue. The collagen fibers of bone are hardened by
deposit of calcium phosphate. Bones supporting your arms and legs consist of an outer shell of
compact bone, with spongy bone in the interior. Compact bone is dense and strong and provides
an attachment site for a muscle. Spongy bone is light, rich in blood vessels, and highly porous. The
cavities of spongy bone contain bone marrow where blood cells are formed. There are three types
of cells associated with bone:

Bone-forming cell (osteoblast ), mature bone cell (osteocyte ), and bone dissolving cells (osteoclast

).

Stem Cell Osteoblast

Fig. 16.3 Cells of bone

@)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Early in development, when bone is replacing cartilage, the osteoclasts invade and dissolve the
cartilage. Then osteoblasts replace it with bone. As bones grow, the matrix of bone is hardened
and the osteoblasts are gradually entrapped within it.

Cartilage : It is much softer than bone. It is a form of connective tissue. It covers ends of the bone
at the joint, and also supports the flexible portion of nose and external ears. The living cells of
cartilage are called chondrocytes. These cells secrete flexible, elastic, non-living matrix collagen
that surrounds the chondrocytes. No blood vessels penetrate into this cartilage. There are three
main types of cartilage.

(i) Hyaline Cartilage : It is the most abundant type in human body. It is found at the movable
joints.

(ii) Elastic Cartilage: It has matrix containing bundles of collagens fibers. It forms external
pinnae of ears and the epiglottis.
(iii) FibroCartilage:

HUMAN SKELETON

Human skeleton can be divided into two parts, axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton.

1) Axial Skeleton

The axial skeleton includes the skull, the vertebrae, ribs and the sternum.

Skull: It is made up of cranium and facial bones. The cranium consists of 8 bones (Fig 16.4), 4
unpaired and 2 paired which protect the brain. Parietal and temporal are paired bones, whereas
frontal, occipital, sohenoid and ethmoid are unpaired bones. Besides that there are 14 facial bones
of which 6 are paired and 2 unpaired. The paired facial bones are maxilla, zygomatic, nasal, lacrimal,
palatine and inferior concha. The unpaired facial bones are mandible and vomer.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 16.4 Human skull

@)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Vertebral Column : Vertebral column extends from the skull to the pelvis to form backbone,
which protects the spinal cord (Fig 16.5). Normally the vertebral column has 4 curvatures, which
provide more strength than does the straight column. The vertebral column consists of 33 vertebrae.
The vertebrae are named according to their location in the body, viz, cervical, thoracic, lumbar and
pelvic.

The cervical vertebrae include seven vertebrae which lie in the neck region. The first two cervical
vertebrae are atlas vertebra and axis vertebra. There are twelve thoracic vertebrae located in the
thoracic region, five in lumbar region and nine in pelvic region which form two sets, sacrum and
coccyx. Sacrum is formed by the fusion of anterior five vertebrae, whereas coccyx is formed by the
fusion of four posterior vertebrae.

Rib cage : It is composed of twelve pairs of ribs that articulate with the thoracic vertebrae. Ten
of them connect anteriorly with sternum, either directly or through the costal arch. The lower two
pairs of ribs are called “floating ribs” because they do not attach to the sternum. The rib cage
provides support to a semi-vaccum chamber called the “chest cavity”.

2) Appendicular Skeleton
The appendicular skeleton consists of pectoral girdle and appendages (fore limbs), and pelvic girdle
and appendages (hind limbs). (Fig 16.5)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

okull

Mandible

Clavicle
Scapula
Sternurn Humerus
Rib
Vertebral
column
Pelvis Una
ilium Sacrum
Coccyx Radius
(tail bone)
Carpals
Ischium Pubis
Metacarpals
Phalanges
Femur
Patella
Tibia
Fitvula
Tarsals : |
Metatarsals hy (? SW,
Phalanges

Fig. 16.5 Human skeleton

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Pectoral Girdle and Fore Limb: Pectoral girdle comprises scapula, suprascapula, and clavicle.
The clavicle connects scapula with sternum.

The fore limb consists of humerus, radius and ulna, 8 carpals, 5 metacarpals and 14 phalanges.

Humerus forms ball and socket joint with scapula, while at distal end humerus forms hinge joint
with radius and ulna. The radius and the ulna at their distal end form multistage joint with eight
wrist bones called carpals. Five metacarpals form the framework of palm of the hand. Five rows of
the phalanges are attached to the metacarpals. They support the fingers.

Pelvic Girdle and Hind Limb: Pelvic girdle attaches the hind limb to the vertebral column (Fig
16.5). It consists of two coxal bones. Each is formed by the fusion of three bones ilium, ischium and
pubis. The pelvic girdle supports the pelvic region.

The hind-limb consists of 1 femur, 2 tibia and fibula, 7 tarsals 5 meta-tarsals and 14 phalanges.
Femur is the proximal bone which forms a hip joint with the hipbone, it is a ball and socket joint.
At the distal end, the femur forms knee joint with the proximal end of two parallel bones called
tibia and fibula. The distal end of the tibia and fibula forms a joint with seven tarsals, which are also
distally attached to five metatarsal bones of ankle. Five rows of the fourteen phalanges of the toes

are attached to metatarsals (Fig 16.5).

Joints

Joints occur where bones meet. They not only hold our skeleton together, but also give it the mobility.
Joints are classified on the basis of the amount of movement allowed by them, into three categories:
(i) Immovable joints — (ii) Slightly movable joints —_ (iii) Freely movable joints

The freely movable joints are of two types viz. hinge joint and ball and socket joint (Fig. 16.6)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Fig 16.6 Three kinds of joints

Joints are also classified on the basis of structure:
1. Fibrous Joints: These joints are held together by short collagen fibers embedded in connective
tissue. Such joints are present in the skull, and they fix teeth into the jaw.

2. Cartilaginous Joints: These joints allow little or no movement. Hyaline cartilage forms joint
between growing bone. The bones held together by fibrous cartilage are found between vertebrae
at the point where coxal bones meet in front of the pelvis.

3. Synovial Joints: These joints contain a cavity filled with fluid and are adapted to reduce friction
between the moving joints. The joint is surrounded by a layer of connective tissue called “fibrous
capsule” and their inner layer the synovial membrane. Some parts of capsule may be modified to
form distinct ligament, holding the bones together.

Based on structure and movements allowed, the synovial joints can be classified further into major
categories.

(i) Hinge Joint : The joint that allows the movements in two directions. These are at elbow and
knee. At these joints, pair of muscles are arranged in the same plane as that of joints. One end of
each muscle, the origin is fixed to the immovable bone on one side of joint and the other end of
muscles, the insertion is attached to the far side of the joint.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

(ii) Ball and Socket Joint: The joint that allows the movement in several directions. Such joints
have at least two pairs of muscles present perpendicular to each other. They provide maximum
flexibility. Hip joint and shoulder joint are the examples of ball and socket joints.

DEFORMITIES OF SKELETON

Human skeleton supports an upright body. Sometimes our skeletal system becomes weak and
results in deformations. The causes of the deformations are variable e.g.

1. Genetic Causes

Cleft palate, a condition in which palatine processes of maxilla and palatine bone fail to fuse. The
persistent opening between the oral and nasal cavity interferes with sucking. It can lead to inhalation
of food into the lungs causing aspiration pneumonia. Microcephaly, the small sized skull is caused
by some genetic defect. Arthritis covers over 100 different types of inflammatory or degenerative
diseases that damage the joints. Osteoarthritis is the most common chronic arthritis, which is a
degenerative joint disease also caused by genetic defect.

2. Hormonal Causes

Osteoporosis is a group of diseases in which bone resorption out paces bone deposit. In this case
bone mass is reduced and chemical composition of the matrix remains normal. Osteoporosis
mostly occurs in aged women, which is related to decreased estrogen level. Other factors which may
contribute include, insufficient exercise, diet poor in calcium and protein, smoking, etc. Estrogen
replacement therapy (ERT) offers the best protection against osteoporotic bone fractures.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

3. Nutritional Causes

Osteomalacia (soft bones) includes a number of disorders in which the bones receive
inadequate minerals. In this disease, calcium salts are not deposited and hence ones
soften and weaken. Weight bearing bones of legs and pelvis bend and deform. The
main symptom is the pain when weight is put on affected bones.

Rickets is another disease in children with bowed legs and deformed pelvis. It is
caused by deficiency of calcium in diet or vitamin ‘D’ deficiency. It is treated by vitamin
‘D' fortified milk and exposing skin to sunlight.

Disc - Slip

Each intervertebral disc is a cushion - like pad composed of an inner semi fluid nucleus
pulposus which acts as rubber ball to give a disc its elasticity and compressibility and
a strong outer ring of fibrocartilage, the annulus fibrosus. The annulus fibrosus holds
together successive vertebrae.

The discs act as shock absorber during walking, jumping, running and to lesser extent bend laterally.
Severe or sudden physical trauma to spines for example from bending forward while lifting a heavy
object may result in herniation of one or more discs. The herniated disc (Commonly known slipped
disc) usually involves rupture of annulus fibrosus followed by protrusion of the spongy nucleus
pulposus. If protrusion presses on spinal cord or on spinal nerves exiting from spinalcord, generate
severe pain or even destruction of these netvous structure. Disc slip is treated with bed rest, traction
and painkiller. If this fails disc may be removed surgically.

Spondylosis

It is the disease, which causes immobility and fusion of vertebral joint.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Sciatica

It is characterized by stabbing pain radiating over the course of sciatic nerve. It results due to injury
of proximal sciatic nerve, which might follow a fall, a herniated disc or improper administration of
an injection into the buttock. This may result in a number of lower limb impairment depending on
the precise nerve root injured. When sciatic nerve is completely transected, the legs become nearly
useless. They cannot be flexed and all foot-ankle movement is lost. Recovery from sciatic injury is
usually slow and incomplete.

Arthritis

Arthritis is inflammatory or degenerative disease that damages joints. It results in pain, stiffness,
swelling of the joint. Acute forms of arthritis usually result from bacterial invasion and are treated
with antibiotics. The membrane, lining the joint thickens, fluid production is decreased, which
consequently leads to increased friction. Chronic arthritis includes osteoarthritis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and gouty arthritis.

REPAIR OF BROKEN BONES

Despite remarkable strength, the bones may break. During youth, most fractures result from
trauma that may twist or break the bones such as sports injuries, automobile accidents, falls etc. In
old age, bones become thin and weak and hence fractures occur more frequently.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

A fracture is treated by reduction which follows realignment of the broken bone ends. There are
two types of reduction: closed and open reduction. In closed reduction the bone ends are coaxed
back to their normal position by physician’s hand. In open reduction surgery is performed and the
bone ends are secured together with pins or wires. After broken bone is reduced, it is immobilized
by a cast (or by traction) to allow the healing process to begin. Healing time is 8-12 weeks, but it is
much longer for large weight — bearing bones and for bones of elderly people (because of their
poorer blood circulation).

The repair process of a simple fracture takes place in four phases:

1. Hematoma Formation : When a bone breaks, the blood vessels in the bone itself, and perhaps
in surrounding are torn resulting in hemorrhage. As a result, a hematoma, a mass of clotted blood,
forms at the fracture site. Soon after, bone cell deprived of food begin to die and the tissue at the
fracture site becomes swollen and hence painful.

2. Soft Callus Formation : Next “soft callus” begins to form in 3-4 weeks. Capillaries grow into the
hematoma and clear up the debris. Fibroblasts and osteoblasts migrate into the fracture site and
begin to construct bone.

3. Bony Callus Formation : Osteoblasts and osteoclasts continue to migrate inward, multiply
rapidly and gradually convert the soft callus into bony callus. Bone formation begins 3-4 weeks
after injury and continues until a firm bony union is formed within 2-3 months later.

4. Remodeling : After several months bony callus is remodeled by removing the excess material on
the outside of the bone. Final structure of remodeled area resembles that of the original unbroken
bone because it responds to the same set of mechanical stimuli.

MUSCLES

Many multicellular animals have evolved specialized cells for movement. These cells contain
numerous filaments of special protein actin and myosin. The vertebrate possess three kinds of
muscle cells, Smooth muscles, skeletal muscles and cardiac muscles (Fig 16.7)

@)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Miucheaus

Muscle fiber

Muscle fiber

Intercalated disc

Nucteus

Muscle fibeer

Miche

Fig. 16.7 Location, characteristics, and functions of the three muscle types.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Property Smooth Cardiac Skeletal
Muscle appearance Unstriped Irregular stripes Regular stripes
Cell shape Spindle Branched Spindle or cylindrical
Number of nuclei One per cell Many per cell Many per cell
Speed of Slow Intermediate Slow to rapid
contraction
Contraction caused Spontaneous, Spontaneous Nervous system
by stretch, nervous
system, hormones
Function Controls movement Pumps blood Moves the skeleton
of substances
through hollow
organs
Voluntary control Usually no Usually no Yes

1. Smooth Muscles

Smooth muscles were the earliest form of muscle to evolve and it is found throughout animal
kingdom. Smooth muscles are long and spindle shape with each containing a single nucleus. It
has no striations. It is not under the voluntary control. We describe smooth muscle tissue most
precisely as visceral, non-striated and involuntary. These muscles are found in the blood vessels,
digestive tract and many other organs.

2. Cardiac Muscles

These are muscles of the heart. They constitute most of the mass of the heart walls. Heart muscle
is composed of chains of single cell, each with its own nucleus. The chain of cells are organized into
fibres that are branched and interconnected. Key words for this muscle type are cardiac, striated
and involuntary

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

3. Skeletal Muscles

The muscles that are attached to the skeleton and are associated with the movement of bones are
called skeletal muscles. The skeletal muscles are consciously controlled and therefore, are called
voluntary muscles. Skeletal muscles are also called striped or striated muscles because they show
alternate light and dark bands, e.g., triceps and biceps. Generally, each end of the entire muscle is
attached to bone by a bundle of collagen, non-elastic fibres, known as tendons.

Skeletal Muscle Fibre : Each muscle consists of muscle bundles, which are further composed of
muscle fibres or cells. Each muscle fibre is a long cylindrical cell with multiple oval nuclei arranged
just beneath its sarcolemma. Skeletal muscle fibres are huge cells. Their diameter is 10 - 100 um.
Sarcoplasm of the muscle fibre is similar to the cytoplasm of other cells but it contains usually large
amount of stored glycogen and unique oxygen bonding protein myoglobin, a red pigment that
stores oxygen.

When viewed in high magnification, each muscle fibre is seen to contain a large number of myofibrils
1-2 um in diameter that run in parallel fashion and extend entire length of the cell. Bundles of these
fibrils are enclosed by the muscle cell membrane or sarcolemma. The myofibrils consist of smaller
contractile units called sarcomere. In each sarcomere a series of dark and light band are evident
along the length of each myofibril. Each dark band is called A band, because it is anisotropic, i.e it
can polarize visible light. The light band called I band is isotropic or non-polarizing. It gives the cell
as a whole its striped appearance. Each A band has a lighter stripe in its mid section called H - zone
(H stands for “hele” mean bright). The H-zone is bisected by dark line called M - line. The | bands
have mid line called Z - line (Z for zwishen means between).

A sarcomere is the region of a myofibril between two successive Z - lines and is the smallest
contractile unit of muscle fibre. The myofibrils contain myofilaments.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Nucleus calcium storage sacs
T tubule Mitochondrion|

Muscle fiber has
many myofibrils

, Myofibril
i Sarcolemma

Sarcomere

Myofibril has many
sarcomeres ;

Sarcomere is
relaxed

x==- i = — £. es —_—_ <<

x=- = -> —_ = —_ <<
—_—>  —_—

ie Z line é line zie

Sarcomere M wi |e ree
is contracted Slaseant Actin Thin Filament
filament filament

M-line

Fig. 16.8 Ultrastructure of skeletal muscle fiber

@)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Infrastructure of Myofilament : Myofilament is made up of thick and thin filaments. The
central thick filaments extend the entire length of the A-band. The thin filaments extend across the
l-band and partly into A band.

The thick filament which is about 16 nm in diameter is composed of myosin. Each myosin molecule
has a tail terminating in two globular heads. Myosin tail consists of two long polypeptide chains
coiled together. The heads are sometimes called cross bridges because they link the thick and the
thin myofilaments together during contraction (Fig. 16.8).

Thin filaments are 7 - 8 nm thick and are composed chiefly of actin molecule. The actin molecules
are arranged in two chain which twist around each other like a twisted double strand of pearls.
Twisting around the actin chains are two strands of another protein, tropomyosin. The other major
protein in thin filament is troponin. It is actually three polypeptide complex, one binds to actin,
another binds to tropomyosin while third binds calcium ions. Each myosin filament is surrounded
by six actin filaments on each end.

Sliding Filament Model

When muscle fibre contracts, the thin and thick filaments undergo shifting. The I-band reduces in
length and Z-line gets closer.

Huxley and A. F. Huxley and their colleagues suggested a hypothesis in 1954 to explain all events
in muscle contraction, this is called “Sliding filament model” of muscle contraction. According to
this theory, the thin filaments slide past the thick one so that actin and myosin filaments overlap to
greater degree. Thus the Z-line is brought close together, I-band shortens, the H zone disappears.
In this process of contraction, the cross bridges of thick filament become attached to binding sites
on the actin filament. The cross bridges then contract to pull the actin filament towards the center
of the sarcomere.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

How the bridges are controlled

When the muscle is at rest, the tropomyosin is disposed in such a way that it covers the sites on the
actin chain where the head of myosin becomes attached. When the muscle is required to contract,
calcium ions bind with the troponin molecule and cause them to move slightly. This has the effect
of displacing the tropomyosin and exposing the binding sites for the myosin head. Once the myosin
head has become attached to the actin filament, ATP is hydrolysed and the bridge goes to its cycle.
This ATP is provided by the large number of mitochondria present in each muscle cell.

From the above account it is revealed that ATP is needed to break the link between the myosin and
the actin. After death, the amount of ATP in the body falls. Under these circumstances the bridges
can not be broken and so they remain firmly bound. This results in the body becoming stiff, a
condition known as rigor mortis.

Controlling the Actin - Myosin Interaction By Ca“ ions

Muscle contraction is initiated by nerve impulse arriving at the neuromuscular junction. Allthe fibres
innervated by a single motor neuron are a “motor unit” and contract simultaneously in response
to the action potential fired by the motor neurons. The sarcolemma of muscle fibre penetrates
deep into the cell to form hollow elongated tube, the transverse tubule, T-tubule the lumen of
which is continuous with the extracellular fluid. The thousands of T - tubules of each muscle cell are
collectively called T-system. It extends and encircles the myofibril at the level of Z-line or A and | -
junction. The T-tubule and the terminal portion of the adjacent envelope of sarcoplasmic reticulum
form triads at regular intervals along the length of the fibril. The nerve impulse is carried through
the T-tubule to the adjacent sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). The calcium gates of the SR open releasing
calcium into the cytosol, thus binding calcium ion to troponin molecules of the thin filament. The
binding sites are exposed and cross bridges with myosin can form, and contraction occurs.

All or None Response: The contraction of each muscle fibre is based on “all or none” principle

i.e. all of its fibrils participate in contraction. The degree of contraction depends upon the number
of muscle fibers that participate in contraction.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Sarcoplasmic Reticulum (S.R) is continuous system of sarco-tubules extending throughout the
sarcoplasm around each myofibril. It is like endoplasmic reticulum but devoid of ribosomes and
exhibits a highly specialized repeating pattern.

Energy For Muscle Contraction

Energy for muscle contraction comes from the ATP. Supply of ATP is. maintained by the aerobic
breakdown of glucose in muscle cell, which comes from stored glycogen in the cell. When more
energy is required due to high metabolism, it is provided by another energy storing substance

called creatine phosphate. Sometime during
oxygen deficiency or very high metabolic
activity such as (prolonged or strenuous
muscular activity), ATP requirement is met
by anaerobic breakdown of glucose into
Lactic acid. Lactic acid accumulation causes
muscle fatigue. At rest, 1/5 of the lactic acid
is broken aerobically and its energy is used
to change the remaining 4/5 lactic acid into
glucose.

Muscle Fatigue

Muscle fatigue is a state of physiological
inability to contract. Muscle fatigue results
from relative deficit of ATP. When no
ATP is available, contractures or states of
continuous contraction result because the
cross bridges are unable to detach. Excess

Effect of Exercise on Muscle

The amount of work a muscle does is reflected in
changes in the muscle itself. When muscles are
used actively, they increase in size or strength
and become more efficient and fatigue resistant.
Aerobic exercises such as swimming, jogging , and
fast walking result in several changes in skeletal
muscles. Capillaries surrounding the muscle fibres,
as well as mitochondria within them increase in
number and fibre synthesizes more myoglobin.
These changes result in more efficient muscle
metabolism and resitance to fatigue. Complete
immobilization of muscle leads to muscle weakness
and severe atrophy.

accumulation of lactic acid and ionic imbalance also contribute to muscle fatigue. Lactic acid, which
causes muscle pH to drop (and the muscle to ache) causes extreme fatigue by breaking glucose.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Tetany

Tetany is the disease caused by low calcium in the blood. It increases the excitability of neurons
and results in loss of sensations. Muscle twitches and convulsion occur. If untreated the system
progresses to spasm of larynx, respiratory paralysis and ultimately death occurs.

Cramp

It is also Known as tetanic contraction of the entire muscle: It lasts for just a few seconds to several
hours, causing the muscles to become taut and painful. It is most common in thigh and hip muscles,
it usually occurs at night or after exercise. It reflects low blood sugar level, electrolyte depletion,
dehydration irritability of spinal cord and neurons.

ARRANGEMENT OF SKELETAL MUSCLES FOR MOVEMENT OF
SKELETON

Skeletal muscle has three parts: origin is the end of muscle which remains fixed when muscle
contracts, insertion is the end of the muscle that moves the bone, and belly is thick part between
origin and insertion, which contracts.
Connective tissue binds other tissues and helps
to maintain body form by holding the various
organs together. Connective tissue fibrils have
two specialized kinds. Ligaments attach bone
to bone and are slightly elastic. Tendons attach
muscles to bones and are non-elastic.
Movement of Bones

The majority of muscle tissue in your body is
skeletal muscle. The skeletal muscles produce
movements by pulling on tendons, cords of
connective tissues that anchor muscle to the
bones. The tendons then pull on bones. Most
muscles pass across a joint and are attached to
the bones that form joints. When such a muscle
contracts, it draws one bone towards or away from the bone with which it articulates.

There are 650 muscles in human body, most of which occur in pairs. At joint, these muscles work
against each other by contraction. This relationship is called antagonism.

@)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Levered movement. Rigid external or internal skeletons are attached to muscles, which move
parts of the skeleton at movable joints. Each bony “lever” is moved by an antagonistic muscle
pair. One muscle reverses the action of the other, so that the lever can return to its original
position.

The best example is the movement of elbow joint by biceps and triceps. The biceps bends the arm
at the elbow joint, and triceps straightens it. The biceps brachii muscle arises by the two heads
from scapula and is inserted into the medial surface of the radius bone. The other two muscles
lie below the biceps brachi. The two muscles are brachialis and brachioradialis. The brachialis is
inserted in the ulna, while brachioradialis is inserted in the radius. When these muscles contract
they lift radius and ulna and bend the arm at the elbow. When triceps contracts it straightens arm
at elbow. In the antagonistic pairs one muscle reverses the effect of the other and they do not
contract simultaneously.

biceps.
(contracted)

(relaxed) (relaxed) triceps

(contracted)

Fig: 16.9 Working of hinge joint at eloow

@)

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

LOCOMOTION IN PROCTOCTISTA AND INVERTEBRATES

There is an immense variety of organisms with different modes of locomotion.
Locomotion In Euglena

Euglena moves with the help of flagellum. As the flagellum is whipped backwards, the organism
moves forward. However, when the flagellum moves forward Euglena does not move backward.
Locomotary flagellum is at the anterior end of the body and pulls the organism forward. Waves of
activity are generated by the flagellum itself, and they pass in a spiral fashion from its base to its tip.
They increase amplitude and velocity. The activity note of the flagellum causes the body of Euglena
to rotate forward about its axis. Euglena is able to change its direction by the active contractile
myonemes which run along the length of its body. When they contract the shape of the body as
well as its direction changes. First the body becomes short and wider at the anterior end then in the
middle and later at the posterior end. This characteristic movement is called Euglenoid movement.

Locomotion in Paramecium

Paramecium moves with the help of cilia. This is called ciliary movement. All the cilia do not move
simultaneously, a bunch of cilia moves in a progressive wave-like manner at a time. The wave starts
at the anterior end and progresses backward.

Cilia are short, fine thread-like extensions of the cell membrane. The length of cilia ranges from
many microns to many hundred microns and the diameter varies from 0.1 to 0.5. u.

A cilium consists of nine peripheral double fibrils, giving the appearance of 8-shaped figure and two
central smaller fibrils. All these fibrils run longitudinally through the cilium. These are covered with
the extensions of the membrane.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

The exact mechanism of movement of cilia is not known. However in 1955 Bradford suggested that
movement of cilia is due to the simultaneous contraction or sliding of double fibrils in two groups
one after the other.

1. Five out of nine (5/9) double fibrils contract or slide simultaneously with the result that cilium
bend or shorten. It is called effective stroke.

2. The four out of nine(4/9) double fibrils contract and cilium becomes, straight. It is called recovery
stroke.

As a result of bending and recovery strokes the Paramecium swims against water the energy for
the movement of cilia is provided from the ATP. The enzyme present in the cilia breaks up ATP to
release energy.

The action of the cilia is coordinated and all the cilia beat together in a sequence to propel the
animal in one direction.

Locomotion in Amoeba
In Amoeba movement takes place by means of pseudopodia. The pseudopodia are finger-like

projections thrown in the direction of flow of the cytoplasm consequently, the body moves in that
direction (Fig 16.10). The exact mechanism of formation of pseudopodia is still debatable.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Ectoplasm

Nucleus

Endoplasm Pseudopodium

Fig: 16.10: Amoeba showing amoeboid movement

Locomotion in Jelly Fish

Jellyfish has an umbrella - like body called bell. First of all water enters in the bell then the bell
contracts, the water is forced out like a jet and the animal moves forward (Fig 16.11). This movement
is known as jet propulsion.

Ejection
of water

— Mouth

Fig. 16.17 Jelly fish showing movement by Jet propulsion

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Locomotion in Earthworm

Earthworm shows accordion like movement, in which setae and muscles both are involved (Fig
16.12). First of all earthworm becomes long and thin. The setae present on the lower side of anterior
end come out, anchor and hold this end firmly. The longitudinal muscles now contract and circular
muscles relax and body shortens thus pulling this portion forward. Then the setae of the posterior
end come out and fix the animal on the ground. Now circular muscles contract, longitudinal muscles
relax and body becomes thin and long. In this way, earthworm moves from one place to the other.

Longitudinal Circular Circular Longitudinal

muscle muscle muscle muscle

relaxed contracted relaxed contracted
Head

i

Bristles

See a —
eo. ON ee

Fig: 16.12 An earthworm crawling, by peristalsis

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Locomotion in Cockroach

The mode of locomotion in cockroach is swift walking but it also takes to flight by its wings. In
walking, the legs are used on one side, the foreleg pulls the body forward and the hind leg pushes
it in the same direction. The middle leg of the opposite side acts as a prop. In the mean time, the
remaining three legs begin to move together and the process is repeated.

Out of the two pairs, the posterior pair of wings brings about the flight. These beat in air in such a
manner that they support the body weight and drive it through the air.

Locomotion in Snail

Snails and mussels are mollusks, which crawl or move very slowly by “foot”.

Locomotion in Star Fish

Starfish moves with the help of tube feet. The tube feet are present on both sides of radial canal that
extends upto the tip of arm. The tube feet extend when water is pumped into them, then they fix
themselves by suction cup to some object. Later on they shorten and pull the body in this direction.
In this way, the starfish moves in any direction. Arms of the starfish also help in swimming.

LOCOMOTION AND SKELETON IN VERTEBRATES

In vertebrates, skeletal muscles and skeleton help in locomotion.

Swimming in Fishes

Swimming in water presents very different problems from walking on land like man or flying in
air like birds. The body of most fishes is streamlined, being tapered at both ends. This means that
water flows readily over the body surface and friction is reduced to a minimum. Apart from the
fins no other structures project from the body of fish and its seems that faster the fish, the more
perfect is the stream lined. The dermal denticles of cartilaginous fish and the scales of bony fish
are kept moist by slimy exudation from mucus or oil glands and this also considerably reduces
friction between fish and water. Other adaptations proceed by fish for moving efficiently through
the water are the fins. The dorsal and ventral, unpaired fins help to stablize the fish, the paired
pectoral and pelvic fins are used for steering and balancing the animals, and caudal or tail fin, in
coordination with paired fins provide forward movement of fish through water. Buoyancy in the
water is maintained by a specialized structure in bony fish called swim bladder.

Locomotion In Amphibian

The general build of body is essentially fish - like in amphibians. Such forms have two means of
locomotion. They wriggle along their belly on the ground with the help of segmentally arranged
muscles as.they “swim on land”, with legs hardly touching the ground when moving deliberately.
On the other hand, a few raise up their body on the legs which then propel them along as movable

levers.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

In the anurans, the entire skeleton and muscular system has become specialized for the peculiar
swimming and jumping methods of locomotion; by means of extensor thrusts of both kind of
limbs, acting together.

Frogs and toads also walk and hop on land due to its strong hind limbs.
Locomotion In Reptiles

The life style of reptiles reveals striking adaptations for locomotion. They move better than
amphibians due to the evolution of skeleton. The reptiles use method of walking and running.
The general form of the reptilian skeleton is based on one inherited from ancient amphibians. The
skeleton is highly ossified to provide greater support.

Reptiles have cervical vertebrae. The first two cervical vertebrae (atlas and axis) provide greater
freedom of movement for head. The axis is modified for rotational movement. The ribs of reptiles
may be highly modified. The ribs of snakes have muscular connections to large belly scales to aid
locomotion. Many prehistoric reptiles were bipedal meaning that they walked on hind limbs. They
had a narrow pelvis and heavy out stretched tail for balance. Bipedal locomotion freed the front
appendages, which became adapted for prey capture or flight in some animals.

Locomotion in Air

The skeleton of a bird is modified for flight. The most obvious adaptations are the bones with large
air spaces which make them lighter.

The fore limbs evolved into wings with very strong pectoral muscles which pull the wings up and
down. The sternum is modified to form keel. The keel is needed for the attachment of muscles.

The body is covered with feathers which give the wing a large surface area to keep the birds in air.
They also keep their bodies warm, so that they can produce enough energy to fly.

The body is streamlined to cut clearly through the air. The feathers lie smoothly against its body, so

that the air can easily flow over them. A bird can fly either passively by gliding or actively by flapping
its wings.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Passive flight; When birds glide, the wings act as aerofoils. An aerofoils is any smooth surface
which moves through the air at an angle,to the airstream. The air flows over the wing in such a way
that the bird is given lift; the amount of lift depends on the angle at which the wing is held relative
to the airstream.

Active flight: When little or no support can be gained from upward air currents, the same effect
can be achieved by flapping the wings. As the birds moves through the air, the air flows more
quickly over the curved upper surface than over the lower surface. This reduces the air pressure on
the top of the wing, compared with air pressure below the wing. There is, therefore, a net upward
pressure on the wing which gives lift to the bird.

Locomotion in Mammals
The most efficient way of supporting the body is seen in mammals. The limbs of the mammals have
undergone further modifications to produce the following modes of locomotion.

1. Plantigrade : In this mode of locomotion the mammals walk on their soles with palm, wrist,
and digits all resting more or less on ground, such as monkeys, apes, man and bear etc.

2. Digitigrade : Some mammals tend to walk on their digits only. They run faster than plantigrade
animals. In these mammals, first digit usually reduces or completely lost as in rabbit, rodents etc.

3. Unguligrade : These mammals walk on the tips of toes modified into hoof as deer, goat. It is
the most swift type of locomotion.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

Evioutionary changes in the arrangement of bones
and related mode of locomotion in major groups of vertebrates

All vertebrates have a common body plan and have skeleton formed of the same basic parts,
but there are many differences. Some of these can be related to changes in habitat for example,
support and locomotion in sea requires adaptations which differ from those needed on land or in
air. Most fishes are propelled forward by means of muscle contraction which pass along the body
from anterior to posterior producing a characteristic S-band locomotion. Alternate contractions on
both side produce lashing movements which drive the fish forward through the water. This type of
motion is seen in cartilaginous fish like dog fish and sharks.

Most land vertebrates are tetrapods. In four footed amphibians and reptiles, the legs emerged
from the sides of the body and the S-wriggle is retained as a part of the body. Girdles and limbs of
tetrapods show clear cut homologies in fundamental structure.

The tetrapod pelvic girdle is united firmly to the sacral region of the vertebral column. It is composed
on each side of three cartilaginous bones ilium, ischium, pubis. A depression, the acetabulum
usually located at the point of junction of three bones, furnishes the articular surface for the femur.
The limbs of tetrapods are fundamentally similar, fore and hind-limbs are also alike.

The tetrapod limb is primitively pentadactyle. Reduction and fusion accounts for many variations
fromthe primitive condition that are encountered. For exampleinthe case of mammalianlocomotion
the legs project beneath the body providing more effective support. In running mammal, stride
length and power are increased by arching the spine first upward with the limbs fully extended, in
this way the force produced by the back muscle is transmitted to ground.

Flight has evolved in three types of vertebrates namely in pterodactyls, birds and bats. It involves
far more muscular effort than swimming and walking or running.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

To generate sufficient lift to remain air-borne a flying organism must have wings with a large
surface area in contact with the air and must beat its wings powerfully. The skeleton of birds
is highly modified for flight. Among the more obvious adaptations are the enlargements of the
pectoral girdle and the development of sternum to form a massive keel for the attachment of
flight muscles. The supra-coracoid muscles provide power for tlhe upward stroke. The lifting action
is possible because the tendon of the supra- coracoid muscles passes through an opening the
formen triosseum formed between the scapula coracoid and clavicle bones and is attached to the
upper surface of the humerus. The number of bones is reduced as compared to those in the limbs
of other vertebrates and many bones are fused together to increase strength.

The shape of the wings greatly influences the speed and the type of flight which can be achieved.
For example long narrow wings like those of gulls and other sea birds are ideal for gliding into wind.
While short broad wings like those of many garden birds are effective for slow flapping flight. Bats
have a quite different arrangement of wing bones but show a parallel range of adaptation for flight.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab

(vi)

(vii)

(vili)

(ix)

Each muscle is enclosed by a membrane known as
Osteoporois in caused by the decrease in the level of
The “molting” is controlled by ahormone

is stored in the muscle cell as reserve food.
Collenchymatous cells lack in their primary wall.
There are vertebrae in the neck region of mammals.
The most abundant proteins in the muscle are

connect a muscle to a bone.

Thick muscle filament is composed of

The shoulder joint is a hinge joint.

Tendons connect bones together at joints.

Arthritis often accompanies aging.

Calcium provides energy to the muscle contraction.
Most of the sclerenchymatous cells are non-living.

Visceral muscle are striated, involuntary and smooth.

16. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
(i) What is the cause of cramps?

(ii) What is the difference between tetanus and muscle tetany?
(iii) What is a ligament?

(iv) What is “nutation”?

(v) How many ribs do not attach with the sternum?

(vi) How is rickets produced?

(vii) What is the cause of tetanus?

(viii) How is muscle fatigue produced?

(ix) Distinguish between the following.

(a) Axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton.

(b) Phototactic and chemotactic stimulus.

(c) Osteocytes and osteoblast.

(d) Brachialis and brachioradialis.

(e) Origin and insertion of muscles.

(f) Bone and cartilage.
(g) Troponin and tropomyosin.

16. Support and Movement

eLearn.Punjab

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)

(xii)
(xiii)
(xiv)

What are the disadvantages of exoskeleton?

What is the sliding filament model? What does it explain?

Describe a hinge joint and explain how it is moved by antagonistic muscle.
Define joints. How are they classified? Explain.

Explain appendicular skeleton with the help of a diagram.

Draw and label the human skull.

Write the major evolutionary adaptation in the lines of tetrapod. .

Define secondary growth. Explain.

What are the main differences between exoskeleton and endoskeleton.
List the functions of skeleton.

Explain the role of osteoclasts in remodeling of bone and describe the structure of
compact bone.

List the main parts of axial skeleton.

Distinguish between fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial joints.

Discuss methods of locomotion in fish, land vertebrates and birds.

CHAPTER

Coordination And
Control


17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

INTRODUCTION

All organisms show certain common characteristics - one of them is to respond to stimuli. These
stimuli may be internal or external, at molecular, sub-cellular, cellular or organism level - to which
the organisms respond. The activities of different body parts in response to these stimuli must be
coordinated. The coordination makes possible the integration of functions essential to organismic
behaviour.

Coordination is must for any organism to survive. In the unicellular organisms coordination exists
between various cellular processes, and they respond to changes in their environments such as
temperature, light intensity, concentration of various chemicals and even to electric current.

In multi-cellular organisms, although there is a division of labour among cells yet every cell can
respond to changes in its immediate vicinity. It must be noted that even the most highly developed
organisms, e.g.’we humans are unable to detect and respond to many changes or stimuli in our
environment. We are unaware and not able to respond to presence of bacteria on the surface of
our body, because our sensory cells do not detect their presence - but some of our internal body
cells do respond and produce chemicals or phagocytose them to destroy them. We are unable to
see different radiations except for visible spectrum of light, but our body cells do respond to some
of them.

Animation 17.1: Coordination and Control

@)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

COORDINATION IN PLANTS
CONTROL THROUGH HORMONES

Plants, as compared to animals, are far from being passive, and are complex dynamic organisms
that grow, change, react (to external/internal stimuli, and show response. It is no exaggeration
to say that plants behave - but their behaviour is fundamentally different from that of animals.
The difference is due to two ways of life - sessile on one hand and motile on the other. Much of
the behaviour of plants depends on variations in growth rates, or changes in the turgidity of cells,
when they show movement. The most obvious difference is in the slow speed of response shown
by plants.

Animals have evolved tissues like muscles, specialized for production of rapid movements. Plants
and animals employ different ways to respond and have evolved control systems accordingly. In
plants the control is solely by the plant hormones while in animals much more variety of hormones
and the nervous control, make them respond with greater speed to specific stimuli.

Hormonal control in plants is relatively a slow process. Even after hormone is synthesized, there is
a delay between the release, its arrival at the target cells, and its action in the body. So, response
to stimulus that induced the secretion of hormone is usually not immediate. Keeping in view
the slowness of the mechanisms of plant movement, the delay involved in hormonal control is
insignificant. All the activities of plants from growth to fruit production and ripening, are under the
control of plant hormones.

Plants therefore, respond to the stimuli by:

1. Regulating their growth and development in appropriate ways.

2. Controlling their body functions through plant hormones or growth hormones.

PLANT MOVEMENTS

You have studied these in the previous chapter. Many plants do not show locomotion (movement
of the whole organism). However, movements of plant organs are possible and are modified
according to the nature and intensity of external stimuli. There are two kinds of plant movements,
autonomic movements and paratonic movements.

@)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL STRESSES IN PLANTS

All plants need water, light, carbon dioxide and a variety of nutrients from their environment
for optimal development and growth. The absence or short supply of any of these factors in
environment may exert environmental stresses on plants affecting their health and survival. If
plants are grown without light, they become extremely long and fail to form chlorophyll. They are
said to be etiolated.

Many plants take on a yellowish hue when they fail to form sufficient chlorophyll. This condition
known as chlorosis is usually arises from short supplies, of mineral nutrients in the soil.

DEFENSE AGAINST PATHOGENS IN PLANTS

Diseases of plants may arise from infections by viruses, bacteria, fungi or lichens in most cases.
You have already studied different diseases caused by the above mentioned pathogens in class XI.
Plants may also show developmental abnormalities. If plants are wounded, they often develop
masses of amorphous material with very poor differentiation known as calluses. Plant tumors
and even plant cancers may arise and spread through the plant as an amorphous invasion of
surrounding well differentiated tissues. Galls are growths on a plant that are induced by parasites
and have usually highly organized growth e.g. The tumors induced by bacteria. They are usually
less differentiated than other types of galls.

Animation 17.2: Defense against pathogens in platns

©

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS AND CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS

In living things, the behavior activities occur at regular intervals which are called biorhythms or
biological rhythms. Biorhythms may occur showing periodicity of about 24-hours. These are called
circadian (Latin circa =about, dies =day) which means about one day, so they are also called diurnal
rhythms.

If the biorhythms are of about 365 days, these rhythms in activity are called circannual.

The organisms come across environmental changes that are cyclical in nature such as days, tides,
and seasons etc. Many organisms maintain internal rhythm or clock, to predict the onset of the
periodic changes and to keep them prepared for these changes.

Biorhythms may be the result of the following:

1. There may be direct response to various changes in the external (exogenous) stimuli.

2. There may be an internal (endogenous) rhythm that progresses the organism’s behaviour in
synchronicity w ith the exogenous temporal period, particularly a 24 hour or a 365 day period.

3. The synchronization mechanism may be a combination of 1 and 2.

The rhythms are in one’s genes but the environment influences the rhythms to some extent. Thus
timing of behavior results from a combination of effects of rhythmical internal processes and timed
events of the environment.

PLANT GROWTH REGULATORY
SUBSTANCES

Some of the special substances produced by the plants
which influence the growth and plant responses to
various stimuli are given below.

©)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

(a ) Auxins : These are indole acetie acid (IAA) or its varients.

* Instem, promote cell enlargement in region behind apex. Promote cell division in cambium.

* Inroot, promote growth at very low concentrations. Inhibit growth at higher concentrations, e.g.
geotropism. Promote growth of roots from cuttings and calluses.

* Promote bud initiation in shoots but sometimes antagonistic to cytokinins and is inhibitory.

* Promote apical dominance and fruit growth. They can sometimes induce parthenocarpy.

* Cause delay in leaf senescence (aging) in a few species.

¢ Inhibit abscission.

Commercial applications: Discovery of [AA led to the synthesis of wide range of compounds by
chemists. The synthetic auxins are economical than IAA to produce and often more active because
plants generally do not have necessary enzymes to break them down.

Synthetic auxins

NAA (Naphthalene acetic acid) Stimulates fruiting - help natural fruit set.

Indole propionic acid Sometimes causes fruit setting in absence of
pollination (parthenocarpy)

2,4 D (2,4 Dichloro phenoxy acetic acid) Selective weed killer Kills broad leaved species
(dicots). Used in cereal crops and lawns to
eliminate weeds.

Inhibits sprouting of potatoes.
Prevents premature fruit drop (retards
abscission)

©)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

(b) Gibberellin: These are produced commercially from fungal cultures.

* Promote cell enlargement in the presence of auxins. Also promote cell division in apical meristem
and cambium.

* Promote ‘bolting’ of some rosette plants.

* Promote bud initiation in shoots of chrysanthemum callus.

* Promote leaf growth and fruit growth. May induce parthenocarpy.

* In apical dominance, enhance action of auxins.

* Break bud and seed dormancy.

¢« Sometimes may substitute for red light. Therefore, promote flowering in longday plants, while
inhibit in short-day plants.

* Cause delay in leaf senescence in a few species.

Commercial applications: Some of their commercial applications are as under.

1. GA promote fruit setting e.g. in tangerines and pears and are used for growing seedless grapes
(parthenocarpy) and also increase the berry size.

2. GA, is used in the brewing industry to stimulate a-amylase production in barley and this promotes
malting.

3. To delay ripening and improve storage life of bananas and grape fruits.

(c) Cytokinins:

- Promote stem growth by cell division in apical meristem and cambium.
¢ Inhibit primary root growth.

¢ Promote lateral root growth.

¢ Promote bud initiation and leaf growth.

¢ Promote fruit growth but can rarely induce parthenocarpy.

¢ Promote lateral bud growth, also break bud dormancy.

¢ Cause delay in leaf senescence.

* Promote stomatal opening.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Commercial application: Cytokinins delay aging of fresh leaf crops, such as cabbage and
lettuce (delay of senescence) as well as keeping flowers fresh. They can also be used to break
dormancy of some seeds.

(d) Abscisic acid :

¢ Inhibits stem and root growth notably during physiological stress, e.g. drought, and waterlogging.
- Promotes bud and seed dormancy.

* Promotes flowering in short day plants, and inhibits in long day plants (antagonisticto gibberellins).
* Sometimes promotes leaf senescence.

¢ Promotes abscission.

* Promotes closing of stomata under conditions of water stress (wilting).

Commercial application: Abscisic acid can be sprayed on tree crops to regulate fruit drop at
the end of the season. This removes the need for picking over a large time-span.

(e) Ethene:

¢ Inhibits stem growth, notably during physiological stress.
¢ Inhibits root growth.

* Breaks dormancy of bud.

* Promotes flowering in pineapple.

* Promotes fruit ripening.

Commercial application: Ethene induces flowering in pineapple. Stimulates ripening of

tomatoes and citrus fruit. The commercial compound ethephon breaks down to release ethene in
plants and is applied to rubber plant to stimulate the flow of latex.

CO-ORDINATION IN ANIMALS

It is brought about in higher animals by nervous co-ordination and chemical co-ordination.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

NERVOUS CO-ORDINATION

This type of co-ordination involves specialised cells or neurons linked together directly or via the
central nervous system, to form network that connects the cell or organs which receive stimuli
(receptors) and those which carry out actions or responses (effectors). The neuron has the capacity
to generate and conduct impulses which travel across the synapse and pass from the receptors to
the effectors, brings about nervous coordination. The elements of nervous system which help in
co-ordination are:

1. Receptors. 2. Neurons 3. Effectors.

1. Receptors

The neuron fibres and cell bodies can be excited by small electric shocks, mechanical, chemical,
light and temperature stimuli. Receptors detect changes in the external and internal environment
of the animal. The receptor may be a cell, or neuron ending or a receptor organ. Receptors are
classified as follows :

(a) Chemoreceptors: These are for smell taste and for blood CO, oxygen, glucose, amino acids and
fatty acid (e.g. receptors in the hypothalamus)

(b) Mechanoreceptors: These detect stimuli of touch pressure, hearing and equilibrium (eg. Free
nerve endings + expanded lip endings + stray endings) !

(c) Photoreceptors (electromagnetic receptors), these respond to stimuli of light for example in
eyes, rods and cones.

(d) Thermoreceptors: These are free nerve endings. These show response to cold and warmth.

(e) Nociceptors: (Undifferentiated endings) which produce the sensation of pain.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Each type of the principal type of sensation that
we can experience pain, touch, sight, sound
and so forth are called modalities of sensation.
Yet despite the fact that we experience these
different modalities of sensation; nerve fibres
transmit only impulses. How is it that different
nerve fibres transmit different modalities of
sensation? The answer to this question is:

1. Each nerve tract terminates at a specific point in the CNS; and the type of sensation is determined
by the point in the nervous system to which the fibre leads. So touch stimulus is carried by nerve
impulse in the ‘touch’ area of the brain. Similarly fibres from the eyes (retina) terminate in the
visual cortex of the brain.

2. Moreover, each receptor organ is specialised to receive a particular type of stimulus and this is
carried to the particular area of the brain.

Animation17.5: Neuroanim

Source and Credit:oia-magazine

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Working of Sensory Receptors with Special Reference to Skin

In the skin there are at least 3 different types of sensory endings involved in touch stimulus reception.
In skin, the receptors are concerned with atleast five different senses: touch, pressure, heat, cold
and pain.

1. Situated at the base of hairs, hair end organs receive touch stimulus.

2. Meissner’s corpuscles (encapsulated endings) which lie in papillae which extend into the ridges
of the fingertips. The corpuscle consists of spiral and much twisted endings, each of which ends
in a knob. These are touch receptors.

3. Pacinian corpuscles - situated quite deep in the body. These are also encapsulated neuron
endings and receive deep pressure stimulus. Those located in the limbs probably form a basis
for vibration sense.

The intensity of stimulus received would either be transmitted in the form of repeated impulses or

by more fibres carrying the impulse to the CNS.

The relative abundance of various types of receptors differs greatly e.g. pain receptors are nearly 27

times more abundant than cold receptors. The cold receptors are nearly 10 times more abundant

than heat or temperature receptors. The receptors are not distributed evenly over the entire surface
of the body e.g. touch receptors are much more numerous in the finger tips than in the skin of the
back, as might be expected in view of the normal functions of those two parts of the body.

The stimulus received by the receptors in the skin which are the endings of sensory neurons is
passed to the motor neurons via inter or associative neurons which are present in the brain and
via spinal cord impulse is sent by the motor neurons to the effectors, which are muscles and glands
(Fig. 17.1).


17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Free nerve
endings(pain)

Meissner
corpuscles

(touch)

Pacini
corpuscles
(pressure)

Fig. 17.1 Sensory receptors of the skin.
The sensations of touch, pressure, heat, cold, and pain are detected by modified sensory neurons
having naked nerve endings (touch and pain receptors) or specialized cellular corpuscles (pressure,
hot and cold receptors).

2. Neurons

The chief structural and functional units of the nervous system are neurons, but there are other
cells, in higher animals, and in humans called neuroglia, which make up as much as half of the
nervous system. Neuroglia play a vital role in the nutrition of neurons and their protection by
myelin sheath. There are three functional types of neurons-the sensory, associative (intermediate/
relay) and motor neurons, in mammals (Fig. 17.2)

@)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Dendrite Dendrite

Receptor
cell

Dendron

Cell
body

Schwann cell

Node

Axon

Neuron-musele
junction

Axon

Muscle terminals

Fig 17.2 Avariety of neuron types in human, beings.

(a) The dendrites unlike the axon, often give a spiny look. (b)The dendrites of certain brain cells
branch profusely, giving cell a treelike appearance, (c) Motor neurons have long axons that run
from the C. nervous system to the effector (muscle); these axons are frequently,”but not always
myelinated. Note the presence of many granules ip the cell body and dendrites and their absence
from the axon.(d) Many sensory neurons have only one fiber, which branches a short distance
from the cell body, one branch (peripheral) running between the receptor site and the dorsal-root
ganglion in which the cell body is located, and the other branch (central) running from the ganglion
into the spinal cord or brain. Except for its terminal portions, the entire fiber is structurally and
functionally of the axon type, even ‘though the peripheral branch c mducts impulses toward the
cell body. A sensory neuron of this type thus has no true dendrites a though the peripheral branch

is often called a dendron because of the direction in which it conducts impulses.

@)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

The neuron has protoplasmic processes arising from its cell body containing nucleus and various
organelle embedded in the cytoplasm. There are two main types of cytoplasmic processes or fibres.
The one which carry impulse towards cell body is called dendron, if it is a single fibre but if smaller
fibres _they are called dendrites (singular: dendrite). The processes conducting impulses away
from cell body are termed axons. These may be more than a meter long in some neurons. Nissl’s
granules which are groups of ribosomes associated with rough E.R, and Golgi apparatus are present
in the cell body. Microtubules, neurofibrils, rough endoplasmic recticulum and mitochondria are
present throughout the axoplasm (cytoplasm of axon) of the neuron.

The cell body or soma is the main nutritional part of the cell and is concerned with the biosynthesis
of materials necessary for the growth and maintenance of the neuron. If the cell body of the neuron
remains intact, it can regenerate axonal and dendrite fibres; but neurons once mature, do not
divide any further.

3. Effectors

These are the structures which respond when they are stimulated by impulse coming via motor
neuron. The principal effectors are glands, which respond by secreting; and muscles which respond
by contracting. Flow of information through the nervous system is explained with the help of a
reflex arc.

Reflex Arc

Flow of impulse through the nervous system involving receptors, neurons, and effectors will be
clear if we study an example of a reflex arc.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

To brain

Dorsal root ganglion

Cell body of sensory
néeuréon

2. Association neuron
Cell body of motor neuron

3. Motor neuron

Spinal Cord
(cross section)

o" SS 4. Effector
NS N —

\
Sensory neuron —

= a=
See —— a ad SS
A

—.

1. Pain receptor ending

Fig. 17.3 The pain-withdrawal reflex

This simple reflex circuit includes each of the four elements of a neural pathway. (1) The sensory
neuron has pain-sensitive endings in the skin and a long fiber leading to the spinal cord. That
neuron stimulates (2) an association neuron in the spinal cord, which in turn stimulates (3) a motor
neuron, also in the cord. The axon of the motor neuron carries action potentials to (4) muscles,
causing them to contract and withdraw the body part from the damaging stimulus. The sensory

neuron also makes a synapse on association neurons not involved in the reflex that carry signals to
the brain, informing it of the danger.

@)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Reflex arc is the path way of passage of impulse during a reflex action. Reflex action is a type of
involuntary action. (Fig. 17.3). The direction of stimulus is from receptors to sensory neuron to
associative (association / relay) neuron and then through motor neuron to the effectors.

Animation17.7: Reflex rotuline
Source and Credit: Corpshumain

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Nerve Impulse

Nerve impulse is a wave of electrochemical changes, which travels along the length of the neuron
involving chemical reactions and movement of ions across the cellmembrane. Electrical potential
is a measure of the capacity to do electrical work. It represents a type of stored energy which is-
manifested during separation of charges across a barrier. In the case of neuron, the charges are
positive and negative ions, and the charge separating barrier is the plasma membrane. The electrical
potential that exists across a cell membrane is known as membrane potential. A typical neuron
at rest is more positive electrically outside than inside the cell membrane. This net difference in
charge between the inner and the outer surface of a non-conducting neuron is called the resting
membrane potential. The major factors which are involved in resting membrane potential are:

1. Sodium and potassium ions: Of the many kinds of ions present in the nerve cells and the
surrounding fluid, sodium (Na*) and potassium (K*) ions are the most important. Sodium ions are
tenfold higher in concentration outside than inside the membrane surface, whereas potassium ions
are twenty times more concentrated inside than outside. All the neurons have very active sodium
and potassium pumps located in their cell membranes. Driven by the splitting of ATP, these pumps
transport Na* out and K* into the cell, both against their respective concentration gradients. For
every two K* that are actively transported inward, three Na* are pumped out. So inside becomes
more negative than the outside ofthe cell membrane o f neurons. (Fig. 17.4)

2. Negative organic ions: The large negative organic ions (such as proteins, organic acids etc)
are much more inside the membrane than outside, where they are only in negligible concentration.
This makes the inside of neuron membrane more negative.

3. Leakage of K+ ions from neurons: The cell membrane is virtually impermeable to all ions
except K+. Since the membrane is slightly permeable to K+, some of it leaks out of the cell. The loss
of this positive ion from the neuron by diffusion accounts for more negative’charges inside than
outside the cell membrane of neuron.

4. No conduction of nerve impulse

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Relative ion
concentration

Outside neuron

KT

Active exchange
Nay

G
G

Fig. 17.4 Resting potential

(a) In the unstimulated state, a neuron has a membrane potential of approximately - 70mV. The
relative concentrations of the principal ions inside and outside the neuron are indicated by the sizes
of the chemical”symbols (Na+ = sodium ion, K+ = potassium ion), (6) Two of the major processes
that contribute to the negative resting potential are the active exchange of Na+ for K+, .and the
outward diffusion of K+. The sodium - potassium pump actively transports Na+ out and K+ into the
cell, and is powered by the splitting of ATP by an associated enzyme, ATPase.

Initiation of nerve impulse: Under normal conditions a nerve impulse is initiated by an

appropriate stimulus (called threshold stimulus) applied at one end of the neuron and it results in
a remarkable localized change in the resting mefmbrane potential.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Animation17.8: Diporepol
Source and Credit:

It disappears for a brief instant and is replaced by anew potential called action or active membrane
potential which is in the form of impulse. During this state, the inner membrane surface becomes
more positive than the outside. This change is so brief (for perhaps a millisecond) that only a
portion of the neuron is in the active membrane potential state.

The major factors involved in changing the resting membrane potential to active membrane
potential are: (Fig 17.5)

1. Na* and K* ions movement: The passage of nerve impulse is associated with increase in
permeability of Na* ions moving inwards upsetting the potential momentarily, making the inside
more positive than outside. Neurophysiologists believe that the increased permeability is due to
the opening of specific pores in the membrane, termed “sodium gates”. When these gates open,
sodium ions rush into the neuron by diffusion. Some K* moves out.

2. Charges are reversed: The inner side of the cell membrane has excess of positive ions (thus
positive charges) at its internal surface, and the outer surface becomes more negative.

Stimulus

hk ae aha

= == a =

@—) ttttt---t+et¢ttttttt

\

+50

Membrane potential (milivolts)

S

©) Time

17.5 Active or action potential

(a) When a neuron is stimulated, the cell membrane at the point of stimulation undergoes a
momentary reversal in charge (dark color) called an action potential. Perhaps for a millisecond,
the inside of the membrane becomes positive relative to the outside, (6b) Sequence of membrane
potential changes associated with an action potential: (1) resting potential (polarized state); (2)
sodium gates open and Na+ diffuses into the cell, causing a depolarization of the membrane; (3)
; sodium gates close and potassium gates open; (4) K+ diffuses out, causing a repolarization of
the membrane; (5) sodium - potassium pump restores original ion gradients and resting potential
(recovery). Steps (2) - (5) take a mere 2- - 3 milliseconds.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

3. Passage of nerve impulse: During active membrane potential, the neuron conducts the
impulse in the form of nerve impulse.

4. Membrane potential: Active membrane potential of +0.05 volts (+50mv) exists.

These changes occur along the length of neuron till the impulse reaches synapse. Soon after passage
of the impulse, the resting membrane potential is restored by the movement of a small number of
ions especially K+ moving out. This neuron now is ready to conduct another impulse.

It may be added that in myelinated neurons the impulse jumps from node to node (node of Ranvier).
This is called saltatory impulse.

Synapse

Consecutive neurons are so arranged that the axon endings of one neuron are connected to the
dendrites of the next neuron. There is no cytoplasmic connection between the two neurons and
microscopic gaps are left between them. Each of these contact points is known as synapse.

A single neuron may form synapses with many incoming fibres of different neurons.

A nerve impulse is passed from one neuron to the other through the synapse, but a single impulse
does not necessarily get across the synapse. It may take two or three impulses arriving in rapid
succession or perhaps simultaneously from two or more fibres to start an impulse in the next
neuron.

The action potential cannot jump from one neuron to the next in line; rather the message is
transmitted across synapse in the form of chemical messenger called neurotransmitter.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

= Direction af
Presynaptic impulzes
neuron é¢

Synaptic wetiches containing
heurolransmitter molecules

Presynaptic

Mitochondrian

Synaptic Knob

sexannaiiie: aaa

membrane

a
Presynaptic miembrane * **s., Neurotransmitter
Synaptic cleft o**e *.°°.” molecules
b

Fig 17.6 Communication across a synapse

When an impulse reaches a synaptic knob, synaptic vesicles within fuse with the presynaptic
membrane, causing the release of neurotransmitter molecules into the synaptic cleft. The
neurotransmitter molecules bind to the receptors, on the postsynaptic membrane, triggering an
action potential in the postsynaptic neuron, by causing changes in its permeability to certain ions.

(Fig. 17.6)

@2)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Neurotransmitters are chemicals which are released at the axon ending of the neurons, at synapse.
Many different types of neurotransmitters are known. These are: acetylcholine, adrenaline, nor-
epinephrine, serotonin and dopamine.

Acetylcholine is the main transmitter for synapses that lie outside the central nervous system.
Others are mostly involved in synaptic transmission within the brain and spinal cord.
Evolution of Nervous System

There are two designs of nervous system in the animal kingdom.

1. A diffused nervous system, such as that of Cnidarians (Hydra, jelly fish and their relatives)
2. A centralized nervous system, found to varying degrees in more complex organisms, from
platyhelminthes to chordates including humans.

To understand the organization of the above mentioned types of nervous system, we would study
them in Hydra, Planaria and humans. Nervous system design is highly co-related with the animal's
life style. The first main type of nervous system is a diffused nervous system. Hydra shows this type
of nervous system (Fig. 17.7a).

Hydra, a cnidarian, is a small animal which is sedentary in its life style and prey and other dangers
are equally likely to come from any direction. Its nervous system consists of a network of neurons,
which is present between the ectoderm and endoderm. There is no head in this animal and so
there is no centralized nervous system i.e. no brain and nerve cords etc. However, a cluster cell of
bodies of neuron’s forming ganglia can be seen here and there. It has been observed that neurons
are so arranged in the network that it is not possible to distinguish them in connected functional
types of neurons as in higher animals i.e. there are no sensory, associative (inter/relay) neurons,
or motor neurons, there are no specialized sense, organs in this animal. It has been observed and
studied that when an appropriate stimulus is given, Hydra responds - and almost the whole body
of the animal responds as a unit. The tentacles are more responsive and react to the stimulus
instantaneously (Fig. 17.7a).

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

The second type of nervous system is present in Planaria (Fig. 17.7b) and humans. It is centralized
nervous system. The nervous system of Planaria is better developed as compared with that of
Hydra because in Planaria:

(i) There is beginning of a centralized nervous system. In the anterior brain region of the body of
planaria,
there is a bilobed mass composed of two ganglia. This acts as a “brairr “or a centralized collection
of neurons. This receives and sends impulses from and to different parts of the body. There is
no such concentration of neurons or a coordinating centre in Hydra - only a network of neurons
iS present.

(ii) There is differentiation of neurons into sensory associative and motor neurons. In Planaria,
associative neurons are present in the brain and longitudinal nerves. Sensory neurons carry
impulse to ‘brain’ or nerves and motor neurons carry impulse from central nervous system to
different parts of the body. In Hydra there is no differentiation of neurons.

(iii) In Planaria at the anterior region, sense organs in the form of eyes and chemoreceptors are
present. There are no specialized sensory organs in Hydra.

(iv) The receptor cells sensitive to pressure and touch-are present in Planaria. There are no
specialized sensory cells in Hydra, but some nerve cells are moo, sensitive, to a particular
stimulus - chemical or mechanical, than others.

(v) There are definite nerves, the longitudinal and lateral in Planaria. There are no nerves in Hydra.
(vi) In Planaria in addition to a superficial nerve net just below epidermis, there is a deeper plexus

embed * 7.74).
ring of Ga nglia Brain
Sie all Longitudial
a nerve cord
diffuse network
of neurons
(a) Hydra (b) Planaria

Fig. 17.7 Nervous systems in Hydra and Planaria.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

17.8 Classification of the human nervous system

HUMAN NERVOUS SYSTEM

Human nervous system is a type of centralized nervous system. Its classification in different
subdivisions and different functions performed by these subdivisions are given in Fig 17.8.

@5)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Central Nervous System (CNS)

The CNS consists of brain (Fig. 17.9) and spinal cord, which are both protected in three ways. Cranium,
which is a part of skull, protects the brain and neural arches, of vertebrae of vertebral column
protect the spinal cord. The brain and spinal cord are also protected by triple layers of meninges.
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), similar in composition to blood plasma, bathes the neurons of brain
and spinal cord and it cushions against the bumps and jolts. Both brain and spinal cord are hollow.
The spinal cord has central canal and brain has many cavities (ventricles) filled by CSF, which is also
present between the meninges.

Brain: The brain can be divided into forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain. Forebrain is further divided
into three functional parts, the thalamus, the limbic system (Fig. 17.10) and the cerebrum. Thalamus
carries sensory information to the limbic system and cerebrum. The information includes sensory
input from auditory and visual pathways, from the skin and from within the body.

The limbic system is located in an arc between the thalamus and cerebrum. Limbic system works
together to produce our most basic and primitive emotions, drives, and behaviours, including
fear, rage, tranquillity, hunger, thirst, pleasure and sexual responses. Portion of limbic system is
also important in the formation of memories. The limbic system consists of hypothalamus, the
amygdala, and hippocampus, as well as nearby regions of cerebrum. The hypothalamus through
its hormone production and neural connections acts as a major co-ordinating centre controlling
body temperature, hunger, the menstrual cycle, water balance, the sleep-wake cycle etc.

n the amygdala, clusters of neurons produce sensation of pleasure, punishment or sexual arousal
when stimulated. It is also involved in the feelings of fear and rage.

17. Coordination and Control

Meninges

Cerebral
coortex

Hypothalamus

Pituitary
Gland

Cerebral
Lorex ~

Te

Skull

Corpus

eLearn.Punjab

Thalamus

Pineal
gland

Thalanvus

~ Hippocampus

Amygdala

hypothalamus

17.9 The human brain
A section through the
midline of the human brain
reveals some of its major
structures.

17.10 The limbic system
and thalamus

The limbic system extends
through several _ brain
regions. It seems to be the
center of most unconscious
emotional behaviors, such
as love, hatred, hunger,
sexual responses, and fear.
The thalamus is a crucial
relay center among the
senses, the limbic system,
and the cerebral cortex.

Hippocampus plays an important role in the formation of long term memory, and thus is required
for learning. Cerebrum is the largest part of the brain and is divided into two halves, called cerebral
hemispheres. These halves communicate with each other by means of a large band of axons, called

corpus callosum.

@)

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Tens of billions of neurons are packed into this part. The outer region, the cerebral cortex, forms
folds called convolutions, which greatly increase its surface area. This part receives sensory
information, processes it, stores some in memory for future use, directs voluntary movements,
and is responsible for the poorly understood process that we call thinking.

The cerebral cortex contains primary sensory areas where signals originating in sensory organs
such as eyes and ears are received and converted into subjective impressions, such as light and
sound. Nearby association areas interpret this information. This area is also involved in speech
and also receives and interprets sensations of touch from all parts of the body. This area is also a
centre for sending impulses to voluntary muscles, controlling movements. This is also involved in
intelligence, reasoning and judgement.

The left cerebral hemisphere controls the right side of the body, and right cerebral hemisphere
controls the left side of the body. Midbrain is reduced in humans, and it contains auditory relay
centre and centre that controls reflex movements of eyes. Midbrain contains reticular formation,
which is a relay centre connecting hindbrain with the forebrain. Reticular formation is very
important in screening the input information, before they reach higher brain centres. Hindbrain
includes the medulla, pons and cerebellum. Medulla controls several automatic functions, such as
breathing, Heart rate, blood pressure and swallowing. Certain neurons in pons, located above the
medulla, appear to influence transitions between sleep and wakefulness, and the rate and pattern
of breathing. The cerebellum is important in co-ordinating movements of the body. The cerebellum
guides, smooth and accurate motions and maintains body position. The cerebellum is also involved
in the learning and memory storage for behaviours. It is best developed in bird , which is engaged
in the complex activity of flight.

Spinal Cord: Medulla oblongata narrows down into an oval shaped hollow cylinder, the spinal
cord, running through the vertebral column. It is made up of a very large number of neurons, the
cell-fibres and bodies of which are arranged in a definite pattern. In cross section, the spinal cord
shows an inner butterfly shaped grey matter, containing a central canal and the outer portion
composed of white matter. Gray matter, as in other parts of nervous system consists of cell bodies
and non-myelinated nerve fibres or tracts. White matter is made up of myelinated nerve fibres or
tracts.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

The spinal cord is the centre for great many reflexes and it serves as a pathway for conduction of
impulses to and from different parts of the body and brain (Fig 17.11).

Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)

It comprises of sensory neurons and motor neurons, which may form ganglia and the nerves.
Ganglia are the concentrations of cell bodies of neurons. The nerves are the bundles of axons or
dendrites, bounded by connective tissue. They may be sensory motor or mixed nerves depending
upon the direction of impulse they conduct. In humans, there are 12 pairs of nerves, which arise
from the brain, or lead to the brain. These nerves are called cerebral or cranial nerves. Some of
these nerves are sensory, Some motor, and some are mixed. From the spinal cord 31 pairs of spinal
nerves arise or lead to spinal cord. All these nerves are mixed having fibres of both sensory and
motor neurons.

17.11 The Spinal cord

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Motor neurons form somatic nervous system, which controls voluntary movements, which are
under the conscious control of the body, involving skeletal muscles. Motor neurons also form
autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary responses by influencing organs, glands
and smooth muscles. The autonomic nervous system is further divided into sympathetic nervous
system and para sympathetic nervous system (Fig 17.9).
Autonomic Nervous System

The motor neurons of autonomic nervous system are divided into the sympathetic and para
sympathetic system. Both of these systems function automatically, innervate all internal organs,
utilize two neurons and one ganglion for each impulse.

Sympathetic system : Most ganglion fibres of the sympathetic system arise from the middle
protion of the spinal cord and almost terminate in ganglia that lie near the cord. This system is
important during emergency situations and is associated with “fight or flight.” This system accelerates
the heart beat, dilates the pupil and inhibits the digestion of food etc.

Parasympathetic system : A few cranial nerves including the vagus nerve together with
the nerves from the bottom portion of spinal cord, form the parasympathetic nervous system. It
promotes all the internal responses which are associated with the relaxed state i.e. contraction 6f
the pupils, promotes digestion of food, retards heart beat etc.

Nervous Disorders

Following are some of the common disorders of nervous system in humans:

1. Parkinson's disease: Itis anervous disorder, characterized byinvoluntary tremors, diminished
motor power and rigidity. The mental faculties are not affected. The disease is believed to be caused
by cell death in a brain area that produces dopamine. Onset of disease is usually in 50’s and 60's.
The disease is slowly progressive; the patient may live for many years. The disease may result by
head trauma. Effective drugs are available such as L- dopa. A naturally occuring protein called glial
cell-line derived: neurotrophic factor (GDNF) has been shown to boost uptake’ofdopamine, when
delivered to lab. rats and monkeys. GDNF may be used in near future for humans in the treatment
of this disease.

2. Epilepsy: It is one of the convulsive disorders of nerves which are characterized by abrupt
transient symptoms of motor, sensory, psychic or autonomic nature, frequently associated with
changes in consciousness. These changes are believed to be secondary to sudden transient
alterations in brain function associated with excessive rapid electric discharges in the gray matter.
The onset of epilepsy is usually before age 30. Later age onset suggests organic disease. In some
patients, emotional disturbances play a significant “trigger” role. Electroencephalography is the
most important test in the study of epilepsy. Anticonvulsant drugs are used. Alcohol aggravates
epilepsy, so persons suffering from epilepsy (Go) avoid alcohol.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

3. Alzheimer’s disease: Alzheimer's disease was first described by Alois Alzheimer in 1907. It
is characterized by the decline in brain function. Its symptoms are similar to those diseases that
cause dementia (memory loss). There is a genetic predisposition to the disease in some people, so
it tends to run in families. There is also evidence that high levels of aluminium may contribute to
the onset of this disease. There is also decline in brain function with age.

Effect of Drugs on Coordination

Action of Nicotine: Nicotine affects post synaptic membrane in CNS and PNS. It mimics the
action of acetylcholine on nicotine receptors, so it is stimulant of nerve impulse. It increases the
heart beat rate, blood pressure and digestive tract mobility. Nicotine may induce vomiting and
diarrhoea and even may cause water retention relation by kidneys.

CHEMICAL COORDINATION

In animals, it involves endocrine system which comprises endocrine glands in various parts of the
body, which secrete hormones. The endocrine or ductless glands are, with a few exceptions, discrete
groups of cells, which make specific chemical compounds called hormones (Greek hormone is
exciting, setting in motion). Endocrine system consists of some 20 endocrine glands/tissues lying in
different parts of the body.

17. Coordination and Control

Hormones

Hormones are organic compounds of varying
structural complexity (see below). They are
poured directly and are transported to blood to
respective target tissues. The hormones affect the
target cells. They do not initiate new biochemical
reactions but produce their effects by regulating
enzymatic and other chemical reactions, already
present. They may either stimulate or inhibit a
function. Hormones may also control some long
term changes, such as rate of growth, rate of
metabolic activity and sexual maturity.

Chemically hormones may be of following four
types:

(i) Proteins (e.g. insulin and glucagon .) (ii) Amino
acids & derivatives (e.g. Thyroxine, epinephrine
and norepinephrine) (iii) Polypeptides (e.g.
vasopressin or anti-diuretic hormone and
oxytocin), and (iv) Steroids (e.g. oestrogens,
testosterone and cortisone.)

ENDOCRINE GLANDS OF
MAMMALS

Hypothalamus

It is a part of the forebrain. It is here that many
of the sensory stimuli of nervous system are
converted into hormonal responses. It is believed
that oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
are produced in hypothalamus and travel down
the nerves to the posterior lobe of pituitary to be
stored. They are released from their storage after
receiving nerve impulses from the hypothalamus.
(Fig 17.13)

@)

eLearn.Punjab

Diréchon of
biood flow

Pituitary .
(anterior 1008) og Pituitary
(posternor lobe
boo
Capillary
Hiownnceve mo
secrehed
fate ine bleed
by pituitary celts
i
Endocrine celia = “Try

im anicreor
Pihuitary

17.13 The Hypothalamus - Pituitary Connection.

Neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus
produce and secrete a variety of hormones.
One of the nerve clusters synthesizes oxytocin
and vasopressin, then stores them in nerve
endings located in the posterior pituitary.
Upon proper stimulation from the brain,
oxytocin and vasopressin are released into
the blood supply of the posterior pituitary.
Other nerve clusters in the hypothalamus
produce and secrete a battery of releasing
and inhibiting hormones, which are carried
by the blood to the anterior pituitary. There,
they regulate the secretion of various tropic
hormones, growth hormone, and prolactin
manufactu red by the anterior pituitary cells.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

The Pituitary Gland

In man, the pituitary gland or hypophysis cerebri is an ovoid structure about 0.5 gm in the adult
and is connected to brain through a short stalk (the infundibulum). It has three lobes viz, anterior,
median and posterior. The anterior lobe is often referred to as the master gland, because in addition
to producing primary hormones it produces the tropic hormones which control the secretion of
homones in many of the other endocrine glands (Fig. 17.13).

Anterior lobe: Anterior lobe of pituitary secretes the following hormones:

1. Somatotrophin hormone (STH) : Somatotrophin releasing factor (SRF) is secreted from
hypothalamus throughout the life. When growth has mostly ceased after adolescence, the hormone
continues to promote protein synthesis throughout the body. If produced in excess during early
life, leads to gigantism or if later in life causes the abnormal development of hands, feet, jaws, etc.
(known as acromegaly). If there is undersecretion, dwarfism results, as well as other symptoms
associated with lack of thyroid and adrenal hormone.

2. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) : Release of thyrotroph in releasing factor from the
hypothalamus is controlled by the levels of nuyoxine in the blood. In the presence of low levels of
thyroxine, there is increasing production of TSH and vice versa (Fig 17.16). It is secreted throughout
life but particularly reaches high levels during the periods of rapid growth and development. It acts
directly on the cells of the thyroid gland, increasing both their numbers and their secretory activity
(Fig. 17.15).

3. Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) (Corticotrophic hormone): Release of
corticotrophin releasing factor from the hypothalamus is controlled by steroid levels in the blood
and by direct nervous stimulation of the hypothalamus as a result of stress e.g. cold, heat, pain,
fright, infections. Excess and deficiency results ui disturbance of normal adrenal functions.

4. Gonadotrophic hormones (GH) : These are follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinising
hormone (LH also called interstitial cell stimulating hormone ICSH, in the male), prolactin (sometimes
inappropriately called luteotrophic hormone, LTH).

FSH and LH/1CSH shareacommon hypothalamic releasing factor. Prolactin is continuously produced
fromthe pituitary andis inhibited by prolactin inhibiting factor (PIH) fromthe hypothalamus. Prolactin
stimulates milk production and acts with LH as described below. FSH in females stimulates follicle
development and secretion of oestrogens from the ovaries; in males it stimulates development
of the germinal epithelium of the testis and sperm production. LH works with FSH to stimulate
oestrogen secretion and rupture of mature follicles to release egg or ovum. It also causes the
lutenisation (lit. “turning yellow’) of the latter and acts synergistically with prolactin to maintain the
corpus luteum (and hence the progesterone it secretes). ICSH in the male stimulates the interstitial
cells of the testis to secrete testosterone.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Median lobe : Median lobe secretes the following hormone:

Melanophore stimulating hormone (MSH) : Its inhibition of secretion is controlled by
hypothalamus. External light governs its secretion. More secretion in pregnancy stimulates
melanocytes in skin to produce brown pigment, melanin, which darkens the skin. Excess MSH is
secreted in Addison's disease. One of the symptoms of which is darkening of the skin.

Posterior lobe: Posterior lobe of the pituitary gland secretes the following hormones:

1. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or Vasopressin: Its secretion iscaused by decrease in blood
pressure, blood volume, and osmotic pressure of the blood which is detected by osmoreceptors in
hypothalamus. External’ sensory stimuli also influence hypothalamic neurosecretory cells. Increased
levels cause increased water reabsorption in distal parts of nephron. A lack of this hormone produce
diabetes insipidus, characterized by production of large quantities o f dilute urine and great thirst.

2. Oxytocin : Its release is stimulated by distension of cervix, decrease in progesterone level in
blood, and neural stimuli during parturition and suckling. Primary action is on smooth muscle,
particularly in the uterus during childbirth, and also causes milk ejection from mammary glands.

Thyroid gland

In mammals it consists of two lobes situated below the larynx (Fig. 17.15). It produces thyroxine
(or tetraiodo-thyonine: TA), tri-iodothyronine or T3 (which has a structure similar to thyroxine
with 3 iodine atoms rather than 4) and calcitonin hormone. The thyroid is active continuously but
produces higher levels of secretions during periods of rapid growth and sexual maturation and in
Stress situations such as cold and hunger.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Thyroxine and tri-iodothyronine, the two hormones act in essentially the same way. They act on the
basal metabolic rate by stimulating the breakdown of glucose and release of heat and generation
of ATP. They also act in conjunction with somatotropin in bringing about growth, and act directly
on brain cells causing them to differentiate. In amphibians, they bring about the process of
metamorphosis. If secretion of thyroid is deficient,, tadpole larva of frog does not metamorphose
to develop into frog, but instead grow to a large sized tadpole.

Excess thyroxine produces a condition called Graves’ disease, with exophthalmic goiter and increase
in the basal metabolic rate. This can lead to cardiac failure if prolonged. The cause of Graves’
disease is the production of an abnormal body protein which continuously stimulates the thyroid
to excessive secretion.

If congenitally deficient, the lack of thyroxine causes cretinism, where the individual fails to develop
normally. They are small, have coarse scanty hair, thick yellowish scaly skin and are mentally
retarded. They also fail to develop sexually. Deficiency later in life, perhaps due to iodine shortage
in diet, produces swelling of the neck (goiter) and may lead to deposition of excess fat as a result
of which’weight is increased. The condition is known as myxoedema, and it is characterized by
puffiness of hands and skin.

All bodily and mental processes are retarded. High Ca* ion concentration in the blood causes
stimulation of the synthesis and release of calcitonin; lowlevels of Ca** ions suppress its manufacture.
Excess or deficiency leads to disturbance of calcium metabolism with its associated effects on nerve,
skeleton, muscle, blood etc. Calcitonin is antogonistic to parathormone hormone.


17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

17.15 The thyroid and parathyroid glands
(a) The thyroid and parathyroid glands are locatevl Mow the Uirynx in the neck’,
(b) Individuals with iodine-deficient diets may have goiter, a condition in which the thyroid
becomes greatly enlarged.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Parathyroids

In man the glands are found embedded in the posterior part of the lateral lobes of the thyroid. These
produce a hormone called parathormone. Low levels of blood Ca** ions stimulate the parathyroid
directly to increase parathormone production whereas high evels of Ca** ions suppress its release.
Under-activity causes a drop in blood Ca** ions which in turn leads to muscular tetany. Over-activity
would lead to a progressive demineralization of the bones similar to rickets, as well as to the
formation of massive kidney stones. Both conditions may be fatal.

Islets of Langerhans (Pancreas)

This is under control of the pituitary trophic hormones STH and ACTH and also responds directly
to the level of blood glucose. The islets contain large number of p cells associated with insulin
production. The smaller number of a cells secrete glucagon. In general, insulin depresses blood
glucose levels, in a variety of ways which include increasing glycogen synthesis and increasing cell
utilization of glucose. It also stimulates conversion of glucose into lipid and protein, which in turn
reduce glucose levels.

Insulin inhibits the hydrolysis of glycogen in the liver and the muscles. Failure to produce insulin
leads to a condition called diabetes mellitus. The symptoms of this are high level of blood sugar,
Sugar in the urine, a disturbance of the body’s osmotic equilibrium and derangement of the
nervous system. Toxic metabolites from fat (which need ‘glucose energy’ for their oxidation) also
accumulate and are only lost from the kidney with valuable metal cations. The body becomes
dehydrated. If excess insulin is produced the utilization of sugar is too great and its level falls in the
blood (hypoglycaemia) which upsets nerve and muscle functioning.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Glucagon is essentially antagonistic to insulin and causes an increase in blood glucose level s. It
does this mainly by promoting breakdown of glycogen to glucose in the liver and muscles. It also
increases the rate of breakdown of fats.

Glucagon abnormalities seem rare as endocrine disorders. Tumors on the a cells will cause excess
glucagon secretions and consequently high blood glucose levels. This in turn damages the a cells
with the results described above.

Adrenals

A pair of adrenal gland is present, one on top of each kidney. Its outer layer in called adrenal
cortex and inner is adrenal medulla. The medulla produces the hormones adrenaline (epinephrine)
and noradrenaline (norepinephrine) The adrenal cortex secretes cortico-steroids such as cortisol,
corticosterone, aldosterone, and androgenic hormones. (Fig. 17.16)

17.16 The adrenal gland

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Adrenaline and noradrenaline hormones: Both adrenaline and noradrenaline are secreted
in stress situations. Essentially adrenaline dilates blood vessels in certain parts of the body such
as the skeletal muscles and increases the heart's output. Noradrenaline constricts blood vessels
but again only in certain areas, such as the gut, so the effects of the two hormones are synergistic
in raising blood pressure. Adrenaline and noradrenaline promote the release of glucose from
liver glycogen and reinforce the effects of the sympathetic system. Rarely found, but in excess,
these hormones lead to abnormally high blood pressures. In rats whose adrenal medulla has
been removed surgically, the ability to withstand any stress situation - such as cold - is markedly
diminished.

Cortical hormones: The adrenal cortex is active at all times but especially so following shock
or stress situations and infections. Cortisol is the glucocorticoid, and brings about an increase in
blood glucose level mainly by its production fronr protein and by antagonizing the action of insulin.

Corticosterone is both a glucocorticoid and a mineralocorticoid; it increases blood glucose levels
and regulates mineral ion balance. Aldosterone is the principal mineralo-corticoid and conserves
the level of Na+ ions in the body by preventing their loss from the kidney tubules.

The destruction of the adrenal cortex, such as occurs in Addison's disease, will lead to general
metabolic disturbance, in particular weakness of muscle action and loss of salts. Stress situations,
such as cold, which would normally be overcome, lead to collapse and death. The reverse of
this is found in Cushing's disease where too much cortical hormone is produced. Symptoms are
an excessive protein breakdown resulting muscular and bone weakness. The high blood sugar
disturbs the metabolism as in diabetes. Androgens cause development of the secondary male
characteristics. Very small amounts of androgens are secreted in both male and female by adrenal
glands. A tumor on the inner part of the adrenal cortex in a female can cause excess of androgens
to be produced and thus the development of certain male characteristics. Such cases are very rare.

Gut

Many parts of the gut function as endocrine tissue. The important hormones produced are:

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

1. Gastrin: Gastrin is the hormone produced by mucosa of the pyloric region of the stomach. It
stimulates the secretion of gastric juice. It is produced under the influence of protein food in the
stomach after it is partially digested.

2. Secretin: It is produced from the duodenum when acid food touches its lining. It affects the
pancreas to produce and release pancreatic juice and also affects the rate of bile production in the
liver.

Gonads

(a) Ovary

1. Oestrogen : Oestrogen is secreted by ripening follicles (and, in many species, by interstitial
cells of the ovary) whose development has been initiated by FSH from the pituitary. Oestrogens
bring about the development of the secondary sexual characters in the female, cause thickening
of the uterine wall and, at a point during the oestrous or menstrual cycle, exert a positive feedback
which results in a sharp rise in LH output by the pituitary. They also aid in healing and repair of
uterine wall after menstruation. Under the influence of oestrogen, some of the cells of uterine wall
become glandular and start secreting proteinaceous secretions which are taken up by the embryo
during its early stages of development. Deficiency of the sex hormones, for one reason or another,
leads

in the young of failure to mature sexually and sterility in the adult.

2. Progesterone : Produced by the ruptured follicle in response to LH from the pituitary.
Progesterone inhibits further FSH secretion from the pituitary, thus preventing any more follicles
from ripening. It also affects the uterus, causing further thickening and vascularization of its wall, and
other areas of the female body, preparing it for maintaining the state of pregnancy. It suppresses
ovulation. That is why it is a major constituent of birth control pill.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

(b) Testes

The testes consist of many coiled seminiferous tubules where the spermatozoa develop and,
between the tubules, regions of interstitial cells produce gonadal hormones called testosterone
and 17 B-hydroxytestosterone.

After the initiation of development, the sex organs in the foetus produce them, and their level
rises fairly consistently until puberty. After puberty the supply of LH (ICSH), and therefore, the level
of testosterone, remains constant. In the foetus, it initiates the development of the sex organs.
At puberty it brings about development of the male secondary characteristics and promotes the
sex drive. The castrated male fails to develop secondary sexual characteristics and his body tends
more towards the form of the immature female.

Feedback Mechanism
It is a type of interaction in which a controlling mechanism is itself controlled by the products of
reactions it is controlling.

For proper body functions, two opposing systems are needed, if there are accelerators, there must
be inhibitors. lf one hormone inthe body promotes or stimulates a reaction, another hormone would
be checking the same. In the body, interaction is mainly maintained due to feedback mechanism.
In this way, concentration of secretions is itself controlled because certain information is passed to
the source or in other words is fed back so that the output of the secretion is adjusted accordingly,
depending on the activity of the body. The interaction between the. pituitary and other endocrine
glands, over which it exerts control, is an example of feedback mechanism and this mechanism is
very common in living systems. Feedback in thyroid gland function is described. (Steps correspond
to the fig. 17.17).

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

G) Cold

( stress
faa,

eurosecretory
cells of hypothalamus

Releasing
hormone

@

Thyroid-stimulating
hormone

Endocrine
* cells of
anterior
pituitary

Thyroxine :

Fig. 17.17 Negative feedback in thyroid gland function

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

1. Low body temperature or stress stimulates neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus, whose
releasing hormones trigger the release of 2.Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the anterior
pituitary. 3. The TSH then stimulates the thyroid gland to release thyroxine. 4. Thyroxine causes an
increase in the metabolic activity of most body cells, generating ATP energy and heat. 5. Both raised
the body temperature and higher thyroxine levels in the blood inhibit the releasing-hormone cells
and the TSH-producing cells.

Comparison of Nervous Coordination

and Chemical Coordination

Similarities:

1. Both hormone producing cells and nerve cells (neurons) synthesize chemical “messenger”.
2. Both release the messenger chemicals in extra cellular spaces of the body.

3. Both help in co-ordination of the body.

4, Both function in response to specific stimuli either from within the body or from

the external environment.

5. Both are homeostatic in function.

Differences:

Nervous Coordination

1. Neurons (sensory, associative and motor),
are the basic units of structure and function. In
addition neuroglial cells are also present, which
provide nutrition and protection to neurons.

2. Chemicals produced by neuron endings act
where they are produced i.e. very close to the
cells they influence, commonly from less than
a micrometer away For example, acetylcholine
produced by nerve endings at synapse, excites
the next neuron.

3. in this system the neurons release its
neurotransmitter into one or a small group of
specific cells.

4 This has immediate effect or show response
to a stimulus instantly.

5. This control is affected through the electrical
Signals that travel within the cell itself and it
releases its neuro transmitters only where it
reaches its target

6, This shows faster or rapid effect. The speed
of impulse in most cases is 100 meters/second;
but maximum speed of nerve impulse recorded
in the human beings is 120 meters/second.

7. The chemicals involved in this system (the
neurotransmitters or neuro hormones) are
short lived i.e. broken down shortly after .heir
release. Thus the effects of messengers sent by
neurons tend to be of much shorter duration.

Chemical Coordination

1. Hormone producing cells and neuro secretory
cells (Such as those found in the hypothalamus),
release hormones and are units of structure
and function.

2. Chemicals produced (the hormones or neuro
hormone) are poured into and are transported
by blood. These hormones affect the target cells,
which are far away from where the hormones
are produced. ADH is produced from posterior
lobe of pituitary giand; but affects the target cells
present in the nephron and collecting tubule of
kidney, to control re-absorption of water.

3. The blood borne hormones bathe millions of
cells indiscriminately and only a few respond to
these hormones.

4. There may have immediate effects (e.g.
insulin), but mostly hormones have prolonged
or delayed effects for example growth hormone.
5. This control involves only chemical stimulation
and the target cells are far away from them:

6. it is not very rapid; but shows slow but
prolonged effects.

7. The hormones are the chemicals, which
remain active for much longer duration within
the blood; and thus have much longer duration
for their actions.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

BEHAVIOUR

Behaviour is divided into two main types, innate behaviour and learned behaviour.

Innate Behaviour

It is a collection of responses that are predetermined by the inheritance of specific nerve or
cytoplasmic pathways in multicellular or unicellular (acellular) organisms. As a result of the built
in pathways,a given stimulus would produce invariably the same response. All plant behaviour is
innate.

These behaviour patterns have been developed and been refined over many generations (selected)
and their primary adaptive significance lies in their survival value to the species.

Another feature is the economy it places on nerve pathways within multicellular organisms since it
does not demand on the higher centre of the nervous system.

Types of innate behaviour:

1. Orientation

(i) Kineses: It is a behaviour in which an organism changes the speed of random movements
which help them to survive in the environment e.g. this type of behaviour enables pilibugs to reach

the moist area which is required for their life.

(ii) Taxes: In contrast to kineses a taxis (plural: taxes) is a directed movement either towards
(positive taxis ) or away from (negative taxis) a stimulus.

2. Reflexes and instincts

These are extremely complex behaviours and include biological rhythms, territorial behaviour,
courtship, mating, aggression, altruism, social hierarchies and social, organizations.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Instincts & Learning

Darwin (1859) was the first to propose an objective definition of instincts in terms of animal
behaviour. He treated instincts as complex reflexes made up of units compatible with the
mechanisms of inheritance, and thus a product of natural selection, that had evolved together with
the other aspects of life. Thus instinctive behaviour is a part of one’s inherited structure by which
the individual responses to a particular stimulus. This response is similar in members of a species.
All animals inherit certain responses which equip them to live having abilities like walking, moving
running and eating etc.

The early ethologists (Uexkull 1934, Lorenz 1935) thought that animals sometimes respond
instinctively to specific though often complex stimuli. Such stimuli came to be called “sign stimuli”.
A sign stimulus is a part of stimulus configuration and may be relatively simple part. For example a
male three-spined stickle back fish has a characteristic red belly when in breeding condition. This is
a ‘sign stimulus’ that elicits aggression in other territorial males.

Instincts equip an animal with specific response to a particular stimulus, thus enabling it to adapt to
its environment. Learning on the other hand, depends on the experiences in one’s own life but for
this to occur, depends upon the development and evolution of the nervous system of that animal.
So the higher animals have higher level of learning. Lower animals because of poorly developed
systems to responds to a particular stimulus learn very slowly, and even in some cases do not
have the ability to modify or change their instinctive behaviour. The selective responses to stimuli
suggested that there must be some built-in mechanism by which sign stimuli were recognized. This
mechanism came to be called the innate releasing mechanism (IRM). The important aspect of this
concept is that the mechanism is envisaged as being innate, that is, both the recognition of the sign
stimulus and the resulting response to it are inborn and characteristic of the species.

Instinct can equip an animal with series of responses. This is important for animals with short life
spans and with little or no parental care. For example, a female digger wasp (Ammophila adriaansei)
prepares a nest, catches caterpillars, kills them by sting, puts them in nest, lays eggs on them and
then closes the nest. After doing all this, she dies. The larvae after emerging from the eggs, start
feeding on caterpillars killed by their mother before death and grow to digger wasps. All this is
completed within few weeks and is done by instincts of digger wasp, which may be responding to
perception of a caterpillar (the possible sign stimulus) in different ways.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Instinctive behaviour Learning behaviour

* This is the type of behaviour that depends « This type of behaviour depends on the
on the heredity material which the animal = environmental influence, but the ability
inherits. The animal may be born with the to modify the behaviour depends on the
right responses built in the nervous system heredity material.
as part of its inherited structure.

* Experience has no obvious influence on this * Experience has an obvious influence on this
type of behaviour. type of behaviour.

* This type of behaviour depends on the « This type of behaviour depends on the
selection operating during the history of — selection operating during the history of the
species, so that it helps in the adaptability of — individual (during one’s life-time) so as to help
the organism in the environment. the organism in its adaptability in the given

environment.

¢ Instinct can equip an animal with a series of * Learning can equip an animal with a set of
responses. This is advantageous for animals adaptive responses to its environment. This
with short life spans, and with little or no is advantageous for those animals -which
parental care. have long life spans and have parental care,

so that they can modify the behaviour by
previous experiences.

* This type of behaviour evolves slowly in the *« This type of behaviour evolves during the

species. life cycle of the individual but the ability of
learning depends on the genetic basis of the

individual.

For example: For example:

(i) Honey bees inherit the ability to form wing (i) Conditioned reflex type |, in case of dogs
muscles and wings for flight. They inherit the where dogs learn to salivate on ringing of bell
tendency to fly towards flowers to seek nectar alone.
and pollen.
(ii) Trial and error learning in case of cat, when
(ii) Behaviour of digger wasp is instinctive; but it learns to press, the lever to open the door of
it does learn certain things during its brief life, the cage.
such as locality of each of its nests, where it has
to return after hunting. (iii) Crawling snail on a sheet of glass, learns that
tapping has no harmful effect and ceases to
respond after few early responses.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Learning Behaviour (Modification through experience)

Thorpe defined learning as that process which manifests itself by adaptive changes in individual
behaviour as a result of experience.

Thorpe classified learning behaviour into six types:
(1) Imprinting

(2) Habituation

(3) Conditioning or conditioned reflex type i.

(4) Operent conditioning or conditioned reflex type ii.
(5) Latent learning

(6) Insight learning.

1. Imprinting : Imprinting is a form of learning which is best known in birds such as geese, ducks,
and chickens, which are all precocial birds. Shortly after hatching, ducklings and other young birds
have a tendency to follow moving objects in their surroundings. They show a brief sensitive period
during which the shape of form of objects can be ‘imprinted’, with the result that the young birds
will follow them. Normally, of course, the first moving object encountered is the mother bird, and
it is obviously adaptive for the young birds to learn her appearance and to follow her. However,
if its parents are absent, a young bird may imprint on other species of birds, human beings, or
inanimate objects.

2. Habituation : Habituation is the simplest form of learning and involves modification of
behaviour through a diminution of response to repeated stimuli. A loss of receptivity to repetitious
stimuli can be useful in preventing a drain of energy and attention for trivial purposes. For examples:

(i) A snail crawling on a sheet of glass retracts into its shell when glass is tapped. After a pause, it

emerges and continues moving. A second tap causes retraction again but it emerges more quickly.
Ultimately, tapping has no effect and snail ceases to respond.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

(ii) Rodents respond to alarm calls by others in their group, if these calls are continued and no
danger is confirmed, further calls may be ignored.

3. Conditioning or conditioned reflex type I: Conditioning or conditioned reflex type |
involves the pairing of an irrelevant stimulus with a natural primary stimulus that elicifs an automatic
response.

Pavlov conditioned the dogs to secrete saliva on ringing of the bell, which is not normal stimulus
for secretion of saliva. In his experiments, he would ring the bell just before giving food to the dogs,
so the dogs became conditioned to secondary stimulus or conditioned stimulus (ringing of bell)
and started secreting saliva in response to it as if it were the natural stimulus. This type of learning
broadens the ability of an organism to react appropriately to environmental changes, since the
conditioning process removes dependence on one kind of reflex symbol for action.

4. Operent conditioning or conditioned reflex type II: Operent conditioning or
conditioned reflex type II (also called trial and error learning) is a more complex type of learning
than habituation. This type of learning has been demonstrated and studied by Thorndike and B.F.
Skinner, a Harvard psychologist. Under natural conditions, the achievement of a particular goal is
the reward that directs random activities into a behavioural pattern. Trial and error repetitions,
step by step, lead to final achievement. Experiments on rats and cats were performed to run a
maze to either get or find food, or to depress a lever and come out of the cage. In this case first
experience is accidental and then it is rewarded, animal learns with latter experience.

5. Latent learning: Thorpe defined latent learning as the association of indifferent stimuli or
situations without patent reward.
Suppose we put aratin amaze as it wanders about and accidentally gets food. Did he learn anything
before getting the food in the first experience? If we put the rat in the same maze again, it may
directly reach the food. That means when the rat was wandering, it did learn something without
even the incentive of any reward.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

6. Insight learning: Kohler performed many experiments on chimpanzees, and showed that
they have higher form of learning called insight learning. Insight learning is an extreme case of
behavioural modification involving the application of insight or reasoning to a novel situation. If
an animal can direct its behaviour to solve a problem for which it has no previous experience then
reasoning is involved. Reasoning in humans appears to involve a recasting of an external situation
in the imagination and a manipulation of the concepts to produce a solution that can be applied
to situations. However, such insight or reason may be found in other primates. This is the highest
form of learning. For example: A chimpanzee is placed in a cage in which a choice piece fruit hangs
from the ceiling. This chimpanzee cannot reach the fruit, but the keeper has placed some boxes
of different sizes in the cage. After a short period of head scratching, the chimpanzee moves the
largest box and piles other smaller boxes over it, and climbs up to reach the fruits.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Q.1 .Fill in the blanks

(i) Neurotransmitter molecules bind to the receptors on the membrane at synapse.
(ii) Excess of hormone is secreted in Addison's disease.

(iii) Operent learning has been demonstrated and studied by and

(iv) are plant hormones which delay the life of fresh leaf crops.

(v) All membranes of neurons have very active and pumps.

Q.2 Write whether the statement is true or false and write the correct statement and
pumps.

(i) Impulses travel much more rapidly along myelinated neurons.

(ii) All glial tissue consist of glial cells.

(iii) Saltatory conduction is carried out by those nerve fibres that have nodes of Ranvier.

(iv) The myelin sheath of neuron is particularly good conductor of electric impulse.

(v) The resting membrane potential is maintained largely by the sodium pump.

(vi) Hormones initiate new biochemical reactions in the body.

Q.4. Short questions
(i) Define cir-cadian rhythm.

(ii) What is the difference between CNS and PNS?
(iii) What are the functions of parathyroid gland?
(iv) Define the term hormone.

(v) What are the commercial applications of auxins?
(vi) List different types of tropisms.

(vii) Write a note on Alzheimer’s disease.

17. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab

Q.5. Extensive questions.
(i) Describe different types of learning behaviour.

(ii) Describe in detail the role of adrenal glands.

(iii) Define nerve impulse. Explain the mechanism involved by labelled diagrams.
(iv) How is the nervous system of Planaria better developed than that of Hydra?
(v) Describe the structure and functions of the different parts of human brain.

(vi) Writea note on pituitary gland.

CHAPTER

Reproduction

Animation.18: reproduction
Source & Credit: wikispaces

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Every species of organisms can reproduce new individuals of that species. In organisms, methods
of reproduction are varied and some are quite complex. It is very important to the survival of
a species or a population. Reproduction is the mechanism that- produces new generations and
maintains a species-population.

Reproduction is of two types, asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction
requires only a single parental organism which gives rise to offspring by mitotic cell division, during
which the total chromosomes content of the cell is exactly replicated and passed on to daugher
cells, so that the offspring are genetically identical to the parent. Methods of asexual reproduction
are fission, sporulation, budding, vegetative propagation, artificial propagation, parthenogenesis
and apomixis etc.

Sexual reproduction usually involves two parents. A fertilized egg is produced through the union of
meiotically produced specialized sex cells (egg and sperm) from each parent. Meiosis or reduction
division gives rise to. gametes (gametogenesis) in which not only the chromosome number is
halved (haploid) but reshuffling of genes leads to recombination of genes. This not only maintains
the chromosome number in a species but also produces genetic variations, an important factor in
the survival and adaptation of a species or a population (Fig. 18.1).

In plants, if there isalternationof generations namely a diploid sporophyte and a haploid
gametophyte, meiosis occurs during spore formation (sporogenesis).

In asexual reproduction, although increase in number of genetically alike individuals from a parent
is very rapid but this is not an adaptive method and may at some stage jeopardize the survival of
a species. Man has favoured this type of reproduction for his own needs, commonly in plants but
now tissue culture technique in plants and cloning in animals are being adopted for producing
organisms of valuable characteristics, without a change in their genetic make up. Cloning has been
practised successfully but its disadvantages like rapid aging and low resistance to environmental
stress and diseases are still the limitations for commercial ventures. Also it is still not being accepted
socially and morally in general.

@)

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS

In plants both sexual and asexual reproduction are foun. In asexual reproduction
layering, grafting, budding etc. are the artificial modes.

In sexual reproduction, plants have diplohaplontic life cycle with alternating diploid sporophyte
and haploid gametophyte generations. If the
two generations are vegetatively similar, such
alternation of generations is referred to as
isomorphic, and if they are dissimilar it is called
heteromorphic.

Seed plants are predominatly present
all around us due to their better sexual
reproduction, modification of flower and
infloresence for pollination, involving
gamete transfer by pollen tubes,food storage for developing embryo, protection by
seed coats and dispersal with the help of fruit formation (angiosperms). Seeds are
capable of enduring unfavourable conditions in dormant form (seed dormancy) and
as soon as, conditions become favourable for establishing the seedling, it germinates.


18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Haploid

4 spores(n)
Thallus(n)
Spore mother (haploid
cells (2n) gametophyte
generation)

\

Female organs Male organs
archegonia (n) antheridia (n)

Sporogonium (2n)
diploid sporophyte
generation
Oospheres (n) Motile
antherozoids(n)
Zygote (2n)

: Fertilizati Swim in surface
rtilization moisture to

in archegonium oospheres
attracted by
(a) chemosecretions
(chemotaxis)

Fig. 18.1 (a) Bryophyte life cycle. Note that the sporophyte is completely dependent upon the gametophyte.

©

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Meiosis
Microspore
mother cells (2n)
Microspores
Microsporangia mother cell (2n)
( pollen sacs ) Melosis \
Male cone of Megaspores (n)
microsporophylls (embryo sacs )
Reet ene Pollination
mother cells (2n)
Megasporangia
(ovules) Female prothalbus (in)
(haploid gametophyte
Female cone of generation)
mepasporophyts Archegonia
Pinus tree (2n) |
(diploid sporophyte Oosphere ae
generation ) Male prothallus (n)
haploid gametophyte
fygote (2n) TScESIE
Antheridial
Fertilization cell (n)
in archégonium Male gametic
. nucleus (n)
(1) Pollen tube

Fig. 18.1 (b) Spermatophyte life cycles (i) Gymnosperm life cycle, Pinus sylvestris (Class Pinatae). (ii) Angiosperm life
cycle.

©)

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

18.1 (ii) Angiosperm life cycle

©)


18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Parthenocarpy

In some cases, fruit development proceeds without fertilization and thus no seed formation takes
place e.g. banana, pineapples and some varieties of oranges and grapes. Such development is
called parthenocarpy. It is due to hormonal imbalance; usually high auxin levels occur in these
ovaries. Parthenocarpy is sometime artificially induced for commercial purposes, by adding auxins
in tomato, peppers etc.

Seed Dormancy

It is the special condition of rest, which enables an embryo to survive long periods of unfavourable
environmental conditions, such as water scarcity or low temperature. During this period of rest
the embryo ceases or limits its growth. This is of great survival importance to the plant in that it
prevents the dormant seed from germinating in response to conditions such as a warm spell in
winter. Germination or resumption of normal growth by a dormant embryo requires certain, very
precise combinations of environmental cues, to avoid any accidental stimulus which may prove
fatal later on.

Fruit set and Fruit ripening

Germinating pollen grain is not only an important structure for safe transfer of
gametes and insurance for fertilization but also a rich source of auxins as well as
commonly stimulating the tissues of the style and ovary to produce more auxin. This
auxin is necessary for ‘fruit set’, i.e. retention of the ovary, which becomes the fruit
after fertilization. Without it abscission of flowers normally occurs, leading to low fruit
yields. After fertilization, the ovary and the ripe seeds continue to produce auxins which
stimulate fruit development. Developing seeds are not only a rich source of auxins and
gibberellins, but also of cytokinins.

@

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

These growth substances are mainly associated with development of the embryo and
accumulation of food reserves in the seed and some times in the pericarp (fruit wall).

Fruitripeningis often accompanied bya burst ofrespiratory activity called the climacteric.
This is associated with ethane production, which helps in ripening of the fruit.

Photoperiodism

Apart from photosynthesis and phototropic responses, another very important way in
which light exerts its influence on living organisms is through variations in day length
called photoperiod. In plants, photoperiod and temperature affect flowering, fruit and
seed production, bud and seed dormancy, leaf fall and germination.

Photoperiod affects flowering, when shoot meristems start producing floral buds
instead of leaves and lateral buds.

Effect of photoperiodism was first studied in 1920 by Garner and Allard. They studied
that tobacco plant flowers only after exposure to a series of short days. Tobacco plant
naturally flowers under same conditions, in autumn, but flowering could be induced
by conditions artificially to short days exposing. With further studies they were able
to classify flowering plants into long-day plants, which require long days for flowering
and day-neutral plants flower without being influenced by photoperiod.

Later on, further studies indicated that it is really the length of the dark period which
is critical. Thus short-day plants are really long-night plants. If they are grown in short
days, but the long night is interrupted by a short light period, flowering is prevented.
Long-day plants will flower in short days if the long night period is interrupted (Table
18.1)


18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Table 18.1 (a) Classification of plants according to photoperiodic requirements for flowering

Short-day plants (SDPs Long-day plants (LDPs) Day-neutaral plants (DNPs)

Flowering induced by dark Flowering induced by dark Flowering indepenedent
periodslongerthanacritical periods shorter than a of photoperiod.

length, e.g. cocklebur 8.5 h; critical length, e.g. henbane

tobacco 10-11h. 13h.

(Under natural conditions

equivalent to days shorter (Under natural conditions

than a critical length, e.g. equivalent to days longer

cocklebur 15.5 h; tobacco than a critical length, e.g.

13- 14h) henbane 11 h). e.g. cucumber, tomato,
e.g. cocklebur (Xanthium), e.g. henbane (Hyoscyamus garden pea, maize, cotton.
chrysanthemum, soyabean, niger), Snapdragon,
tobacco, strawberry cabbage, spring wheat,

Spring barley.

Table 18.1 (b) Some phytochrome-controlled responses in plants.
General process effected Red light promotes

Stimulates flowering in long-day plants.
Photoperiodism Inhibits flowering in short-day plants.
See flowering.

@)

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Further experimentation also revealed that quantity of light is also influenced by the quality of
light. Cocklebur, a short day plant, will not flower if its long night is interrupted but experiments
revealed that red light was effective in preventing flowering and far-red light reversed the effect of
red light. It was also demonstrated that the last light treatment always determines the response.
This response to light intensity and quality led to the discovery of blue pigment that is red light
sensitive protein, the phytochromes.

Phytochrome exists in two forms i.e. P 660 and P 730. P 660 a quiscent form absorbs red light at a
wave length of 660 nm and is converted to active P 730, P 730 absorbs far red light at 730 nm and
is converted to P 660. In nature, the P 660 to P 730 conversion takes place in day light and P 730
to P 660 conversion occurs in the dark. Thus during the day a plant has P 730 phytochromes while
during the night it contains more phytochromes in the form of P 660. The presence of either form
provides the plants with a means of detecting whether it is in a light or dark environment. The rate
at which P 730 is converted to P 660 provides the plant with a “clock” for measuring the duration
of darkness.

It has been found that red light inhibits flowering the short day plants but promotes flowering in
long day plants, under conditions during which flowering normally takes place. This observation led
to hypothesize that the P730-P660 interconversion might be the lant time - regulator for flowering.
According to this hhypothesis, p 730, converted from P 660 by the absorption of red light, would
inhibit flowering in short day plants but promote flowering in long day plants. Because P 730
accumulates in the day and diminishes at night, short day plants coud flower only if the night were
long enough, during which a great amount of P730 would not be completely inactivated, so that
enough P 730 would remain at the end of night to promote flowering. But now it is generally agreed
that the time measuring phenomenon of flowering is not totally controlled by the interconversion
of P 660 to P 730. Other factors, like presence or absence of light and length of dark, or light
period also play an important role in flowering. Phytochromes seems to be responsible for the
detection of either light or darkness. The biological clock once stimulated causes production of
florigen hormone in leaves, which travels through phloem to the floral buds, initiating flowering.
Vernalisation

Biennials and perennial plants are stimulated to flowering by exposure to low
temperature. This is called vernalisation. The low temperature stimulus is received
by the shoot apex of a mature stem or embryo of the seed but not by the leaves as in

photoperiodism. ©

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

For some plants, vernalisation is an absolute requirement or in some cases it simply
assists in inducing flowering. The duration of low temperature (chilling) treatment
required varies from four days to three months.

Temperature around 4°C is found to be very effective. It stimulates the production
of “vernalin” hormone which induces vernalisation, it is now believed that vemalin is
nothing special but actually is gibberellin.

Photoperiodism and vernalisation serve to synchronise the reproductive behaviour of
plants with their environment, ensuring reproduction at favourable times of year. They
also ensure that members of the same species flower at the same time, encouraging
cross pollination for genetic variability.

REPRODUCTION IN ANIMALS

Animals like plants also reproduce both asexually as well as sexually. But asexual reproduction
is less common in animals as compared to plants. Binary fission, multiple fission (animal like
protoctists) budding (Hydra) parthenogenesis, tissue culturing, cloning and identical twins are the
common asexual methods of reproduction.


18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Asexual Reproduction

Parthenogenesis is defined as the development of an egg without fertilization, ants, bees and
wasps are good examples. In the honeybees, males (or drones) develop from unfertilized eggs.
The queen bee, though carrying male gametes from male, has the ability to lay eggs that have not
been fertilized. The sperms she receives from a drone bee are stored in a pouch closed off by a
valve. The eggs may be fertilized or may not be fertilized from the stored sperms. The haploid egg
develop into haploid offspring, it is called haploid parthenogensis.

In some cases e.g. in aphids, diploid parthenogenesis may occur, in which the egg- producing cells of
the female, undergo a modified form of meiosis involving total non-disjuction of the chromosomes,
they retain the diploid number of chromosome. Egg (diploid) develops into young females.
Parthenogenesis has the advantage of accelerating the normal reproductive rate.

TISSUE CULTURING AND CLONING

In tissue culturing technique in plants, cambium tissue excised from plants can be stimulated by the
addition of nutrients, cytokinins, and IAA (indole acetic acid). These cells show continuous growth
and differentiate into a new plant, genetically identical to their parents.

Tissue culture is now widely used for the rapid propagation of desired varieties or for varieties
difficult to propagate by cuttings. Similar techniques have been developed for the tissue culture of
animal cells.


18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Organisms produced from a single cell by subculturing (cloning) are called clones. In
animals and especially among vertebrates, a nucleus from the somatic cell is removed
and introduced into an egg cell, whose own nucleus has been destroyed by ultra violet
radiation. The egg with transplanted diploid somatic cell nucleus develops into an
organism, genetically identical to the parent who has contributed the nucleus.

The cloning of desirable animals such as prize bulls, race horses etc. might be as useful as cloning
of useful varieties of plants.

However, the application of the technique to humans would be open to serious moral questions.
Theoretically any number of genetically identical copies of the same man or woman might be made.
The use of cloned cells allows the quantitative study of the action of hormones, drugs and antibodies
to be made on cells. Such a technique is a useful substitute for investigating the effect of drugs,
cosmetics and pharmaceutical products on animal cells without exposing laboratory animals to
these chemicals.

Cloning has the advantage that all the offspring behave similarly, but if an environmental hazard
develop (like an out break of a disease), non resistant strains are present to lessen the impact. Also
the degree to which environment influences clone development is not fully known and any cloned
cell would have to go through all the phases of development once again including embryo, fetus,
baby and child hood (in case of human beings).

IDENTICAL TWINS

In higher vertebrates including man, zygote after fertilization undergoes cleavage (cell division by
mitosis). When embryo is at two celled stage, the two blastomeres, instead of remaining together,
may separate and behave as two independent zygotes, each giving rise to a new individual. Both
the organisms are products of mitosis, thus they have identical genetic make up and are called
identical twins. They are produced mitotically (asexually).

In some cases, more than one egg is produced by the female and all these eggs are independently
fertilized forming two or more zygote. These zygotes develop into new offsprings, but with different
genetic combinations. Such atwins or triplets are called fraternal twins or triplets. They are produced
sexually.

@)

18. Reproduction

SEXUAL REPRODUCTION

eLearn.Punjab

It is thought that asexual method of reproduction is a primitive form of reproduction than the
sexual reproduction. At a later stage, a mechanism have evolved leading to production and union
of gametes. Meiosis and genetic recombination played a major role in the development of more
complex forms of life and types of gametes, fromidentical gametes (isogametes) to the heterogametic
stage of motile male gametes (sperms or antherozoid) and non-motile female gametes eggs (ova).
Sexual reproduction has advantage over asexual reproduction which is elaborated in the following

table 18.2.

Table 18.2

One parent only.

No gametes are produced.

Meiosis absent.

Offsprings identical to parent.

Commonly occurs in_ plants, less
differentiated animals and micro-
organisms Absent in more differentiated
animals.

Often results in rapid production of large
number of offsprings.

Usually two parents.

Gametes are produced. These are
haploid and nuclei of two gametes fuse
(fertilization) to form a diploid zygote.

Meiosis is present at some stage in life
cycle to prevent chromosome doubling in
every generation.

Offsprings are not identical to parents.
They show genetic variation as a result of
genetic recombination

Occurs in the majority of plant and animal

species.

Less rapid increase in number.

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Both in animals and plants, evolution of sexual reproduction also lead to the differentiation of
sexes (male or female). Organisms are either having one sex (unisexual) or both the sexes
(hermaphrodite or bisexual). Advance mode of sexual reproduction has unisexuality in animals
but in plants bisexuality in general is retained. Despite the bisexuality (tape worm, earthworm etc.),
cross fertilization is ensured for maintaining the advantage of genetic recombination.

Fertilization is the process which leads to the union of gametes. Fertilization may occur outside the
body (external fertilization) or inside the body of the female (internal fertilization).

External fertilization occurs in aquatic environment where male gametes can swim towards the
female-gametes in water medium. Development is also external due to the constant / stable
conditions of water (frog, fish etc.)

In terrestrial conditions, fertilization is internal. Soerms are lodged in the female body where
fertilization occurs. This may lead to external development as in reptiles and birds. They lay shelled
eggs to protect the developing embryo from harsh terrestrial conditions. Such animals are called
oviparous.

In mammals, internal fertilization leads to internal development and development of embryo is
accomplished inside the female body, which gives birth to young one - such animals are called
viviparous.

In some mammals like duckbill platypus and spiny ant-eater internal fertilization leads to internal
development of young one in a shelled egg and when development is completed, shelled egg is laid
which hatches to offspring This is called ovoviviparous condition.

Viviparous and ovoviviparous animals provide more protection to their young one during

development. Nourishment is provided either through stored food in the egg or through placenta
by the mother.

@)

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

REPRODUCTION IN MAN

Male and female have separate reproductive systems.

(a) Male Reproductive System

Male reproductive system consists of external genitalia which consist of a pair of testes which lie
outside the body, in the sac-like scrotum and male copulatory organ which is used to transfer the
sperms into the female reproductive tract. Each testis consists of a highly complex duct system
called seminiferous tubules, in which repeated division by the cells of the germinal epithelium
produce spermatogonia. These increase in size and differentiate into primary spermatocytes
which undergo meiotic division to form secondary spermatocytes and spermatids. Eventually, the
spermatids differentiate into mature sperms. Fluid secreted by sertoli cells provides liquid medium,
protection and nourishment to sperms while they are in tl e tubules.

(Fig. 18.2 a,b, Fig. 18.3). The sperms are then transferred to the main duct of the male reproductive
tract, the vas deferens, which forms highly convoluted epididymis. The sperms then pass through
the urinogenital duct and ‘are discharged out.

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Superior pubic
ranius (cut)

Sperm duct

Corpus cavernesum


18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Plane of section
Lumen of seminiferous tubule

a
“ —— ey

OSS x] LF, me te <<." Basement membrane
Seminiferous tubles ea pe Ah
a =

Interstitial cells 1% ae fe ca Wir
e+ +
Germinal epithelial cell <= Sy 2 @ Spermatozoa
Seet re a ie .
(b) a

Fig. 18.2 The human male reproductive system
The male reproductive system consists of two testes that produce sperms, ducts that carry the sperms, and various glands.

Meiosis | Meiosis Il
\
a ‘hi.
&
AR ee
. . ae an Ss \
(diploid) =
¥ & ‘\
(a) Gamete formation in the male Spermatids Sperm cells
(haptoid) (haploid)

Fig. 18.3 Gamete formation

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Between the seminiferous tubules are interstitial cells which secrete testesterone. This hormone
is essential for the successful production of sperms and also controls the development of male
secondary sexual characteristics during puberty.

(b) Female Reproductive System

The female reproductive system consists of ovaries, oviducts, uterus and the external genitalia
(18.4).

A pair of ovaries lies within the body cavity of the female. Germ cells in the ovary produce many
oogonia which divide mitotically to form primary oocytes. These are enclosed in groups of follicle
cells. The primary oocyte divides meiotically into the haploid secondary oocyte and first polar body.
Second meiotic division in the oocyte proceeds as far as metaphase but is not completed until the
oocyte is fertilized by the sperm. In human only one ovum is usually discharged from the ovary at
one time, this phenomenon is called ovulation.

Ovaries Oviduct

= ——

ef

~ A

\ LAS a = 4 - >.

oO) : ~*~ Follicle
Corpus luteum Egg cell

: Ulterine wall

Body of uterus i
Endometrium
Cervix
Vagina

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Meiosis 1 Secondary Oocyte Meiosis II
es ee
Ff + j-——————__————————-
4
Oocyte / Polar bodies Egg cell
(diploid) Polar body (haploid) (haploid)

Fig.18.4 (a)The human female reproductive system (b) Gamete formation

The ovum is then transferred to the oviduct generally called fallopian tube Or

uterine tube. The uterine tube opens into the uterus. The fertilization of the ovum takes place in the
proximal part of the oviduct. The fertilized ovum (zygote) enters the uterus where it is implanted
(conceived) and undergoes further development. A placenta is established between the uterine
and foetal tissues for the exchange of oxygen,carbondioxide, waste, nutrients and other materials.
Uterus opens into the vagina through cervix. Urethra and vagina have independent openings to
the exterior.

Female Reproductive cycle: In females the production of egg is a cyclic activity as compared
to males, where gamete production and release is a continuous process beginning at puberty and
lasting throughout life.

In human females, the periodic reproductive cycle is completed in approximately 28 days and
involves changes in the structure and function of the whole reproductive system. It is called the
menstrual cycle and can be divided into four phases. The events of the menstrual cycle involve
the ovaries (ovarian cycle) and the uterus (uterine cycle) and these are regulated by pituitary
gonadotropins.

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

Primary steps in female reproductive cycles are:

1. The pituitary gland on the onset of puberty, releases follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) which
stimulates the development of several primary follicles. Only one of these follicles continues to
grow with its primary oocytes while the rest break down by a degenerative process known as
follicle atresia.

2. The ovary, under the stimulus of FSH, also produces estrogen hormone.-This, on one hand,
stimulates the endometrium (internal living of the uterus wall) and vascularizes it, and on the other
hand, inhibits the secretion of FSH from pituitary gland.

3. Decrease of FSH and increase of estrogen, causes the pituitary gland to secrete luteinizing
hormone (LH) which induces ovulation - the release of ovum from the follicle.

4. The follicle cells, after release of the egg. are modified to form a special structure called corpus
luteum. This yellowish glandular structure starts” secreting hormone called progesterone. This
hormone develops the endometrium and make it receptive for the implantation of the zygote
(placenta formation).

5. If fertilization does not occur, the corpus luteum starts degenerating. The progesterone secretion
diminishes and its supporting effect on the spongy endometrium is reduced, which suffers a
breakdown. This causes the discharge of blood and cell debris known as menstruation. This stage
usually lasts for 3 - 7 days (Fig 18.5)


18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

The cycle is thus completed and the uterus is ready to enter into the next cycle. The human menstrual
cycle generally repeats every 28 days although there is considerable variation in different individuals
or even within the same individual at different times of her age. The end or complete stop of the
menstrual cycle is called menupause, after which the female stops producing the ova.

Malnourishment and emotional stresses effect the female reproductive cycle, which
may be disturbed. The cycle is not completed in its normal 28 days.

follicle ;
Primary follicle

Ovary

Folliculer fluid

Corona radiata

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

conus lutuem

Thickness of endometrium ovarian events

Mentruation Proliferative phase Secretory phase Mentruation

Fig. 18.5 The ovarian and uterine cycles in human female

The release of a secondary oocyte (ovulation) is timed to coincide with the thickening of the lining of
the uterus. The uterine cycle in humans involves the preparation of the uterine wall to receive the
embryo if fertilization occurs. Knowing how these two cycles compare, it is possible to determine
when pregnancy is most likely to occur.

Birth: The total gestation period (pregnancy) is usually about 280 days.

Once the placenta is established, it starts secreting the progesterone hormone which maintains the
pregnancy. Any disturbance in its secretion may lead to premature birth or miscarriage. Human
embryo remains enclosed in amniotic sac filled with anmiotic fluid which is protective and shock

absorpitive.

@)

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

During this period, pituitary gland produces luteotropic hormone (LTH). Placenta also secretes
human placental lactogen. Both these hormones stimulate mammary development in preparation
for lactation.

From beginning of the 3rd month of pregnancy, the human embryo is referred to as the fetus. Most
of the major organs are formed by the 12th week of pregnancy and the remainder of the gestation
period is taken up by growth.

It was thought that hormonal activities within the mother i.e. decrease in progesterone level onset
the birth. But recent evidence suggest that there is a high degree of fetal involvement in the timing of
birth. The initial stage of birth is the result of the stimuli from the fetal pituitary. The ACTH released
from fetal pituitary stimulates the fetal adrenal gland to release corticosteroids, which cross the
placental barrier and enter the maternal blood circulation causing a decrease in progesterone
production. The reduction of progesterone level, stimulates the pituitary gland to produce oxytocin
hormone. This induces labour pains, i.e. contraction of the uterus wall. The release of oxytocin
occurs in “waves” during labour and provides the force to expel the fetus from the uterus.

The cervix dilates and the uterine contractions spread down over the uterus and are strongest
from top to bottom. Thus, pushing the baby downward leading to the delivery of the baby. The
umblical cord is ligated and baby is released from the mother.

Within 10-45 minutes after birth, the uterus contracts and separate the placenta from the wall of
the uterus and placenta then passes out through the vagina. This is called after birth. Bleeding,
throughout this period, is controlled by the contraction of smooth muscle fibers which completely
surround all uterine blood vessels supplying the placenta. Average loss of blood is about 350 cm?.

TEST TUBE BABIES

Recent biotechnical advantages has led to many improvements in human life. One of
the important aspect is the test tube babies.

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab

mbilical
rib

Chorion

——

Amnilon

Amniotic sac
containing
amniotic fluid

Fig. . 18.6 Placental structure

The embryonic blood vessels that supply the developing child with nutrients and remove the
metabolic wastes are separated from the blood vessels of the mother. Because of this separation,
the placenta can selectively filter many types of incoming materials and microorganisms.

Parents which are unable to enjoy the normal process of fertilization and birth of
their offspring due to some physiological and physical abnormalities in any of the two
parents are being benefited with this method.

Parental sperm and ovum is fertilized in vitro - outside the female body and then the
zygote is implanted back into the mother uterus, placenta establishes and remaining
development takes place in the body of the mother leading to normal birth.

@5)

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES (STD)

Unhealthy attitudes and low moral values sometimes lead to serious complication. The carrier
may transmit this disease to their healthy partners.

(I) Gonorrhoa

It is caused by a gram positive bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae, mainly affecting the mucous
membrane of urinogenital tract. New born infants may acquire serious eye infections if they pass
through the infected birth canal. It is highly contagious through sexual contacts.

(11) Syphilis

It is caused by a spirochaete, Treponema pallidum. It damages the reproductive organs, eyes bones
joints, central nervous system, heart and skin. Sexual contact is the major source of its dissimination.

(111) Genital Herpes
It is caused by a herpes simplex type 2 virus, most frequently transmitted by sexual contact causing
infection of the genitalia. It produces genital soreness and ulcers in the infected areas. In infected

pregnant woman, virus can be transmitted to infant during birth, causing damage to eyes and CNS
of the infant.

AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome)

You are already familiar with this dangerous disease. Sexual contact is one of the major sources of
its spread.

Control : The above dreadful sexual diseases can be controlled and prevented by avoiding

sexual contacts with carrier or diseased person and adopting the hygienic conditions. The treatment
involves medication for a long period except AIDS at present.

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Exercise

1. Asexual reproduction requires only a single organism

2. Sexual reproduction usually involves parents.

3. Phytochromes are the special Sensitive pigments

4, External fertilization occurs in environment.

5. and animals provide more protection to their young one during
development

6. A placenta is established between the uterine and tissues for the exchange
of oxygen.

7. The reduction of progesterone level, stimulates the gland to produce

oxytocin hormone.

1. Asexual reproduction involves mitotic cell division.

2. Asexually produced offspring are genetically identical to their parents.
3. Sexual reproduction involves single parent.

4, Sexually produced offspring are identical to their parent.

1. What changes occur in ovulation and menstruation during pregnancy?

2. What is the difference between oogenesis and spermatogenesis in humans?
3. How is a seed formed?

4, What is the importance of seed in the life cycle of a plant.

@)

18. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
1. What structures are associated with the human female reproductive system? What
are their functions?
2. What are the functions of placenta during pregnancy?
3. Describe human menstrual cycle.
4, Write notes on the following:
(a) Parthenogenesis
(0) Herpes Genitalia

(c) Asexual reproduction
(d) Seedless fruits

CHAPTER

oR) | GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT

Animation 19: Homeostasis

Source & Credit: Wikispaces

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

In the course of its life cycle an organism changes from a fertilized egg into an adult. As
development proceeds, all sorts of the changes take place. The most obvious change
is growth. The progressive changes which are undergone before an organism acquires
its adult form constitute embryonic development. Growth is the permanent and
irreversible increase in size that occurs as an organism mature.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN PLANTS

In plants growth and development involve cell division, elongation and differentiation
of cells into tissues and then organs. Growth is an irreversible increase in size and
development is a programmed series of stages from a simpler to more complex form.
As development proceeds, cellular differentiation of structure and function takes place.

A plant has a growth pattern called open growth. Throughout life, the plant adds new
organs such as branches, leaves and roots, enlarging from the tips of roots and shoot
but the rate of growth is not uniform throughout the plant body. At the beginning, the
growth is slow, but gradually it becomes rapid, attains a maximum, then gradually slows
down. In vascular plants, growth occurs through the activity of meristems. Meristems
are young tissues or group of cells that retain the potential to divide. In lower plants,
the entire plant body is capable of growing, but in higher plants, the entire plant body
is not capable of growing but growth is limited to certain regions known as growing
points. These growing points consist of groups of cells which are capable of division,
these growing points are called meristems. These meristematic cells are located at the
stem and root and they are of the following types.

(1) Apical Meristems

The apical meristems are found at the tips of roots and shoot and are primarily
concerned with the extension of plant body. These are perpetual growth zones found
at the apices of roots and stems. They are responsible for increase in the number of
cells at the tips of roots and stem, so they play important role in primary growth (Fig
19.1).

@)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Animation 19.1: Apical Meristems
Source & Credit:
(11) Intercalary Meristems
These are the parts of apical meristem which get separated from apex by permanent

tissues. They are situated at the bases of internodes in many plants. They play important
role in the production of leaves and flowers. These are of temporary nature.

i all
ert,
vascular tissues cs e 1
: will form 2) SBE
ir tion vascular tissues
| will form
\ Apical meristem
Leaf primordium
leaf base
Apical meristem
Axillary bud
Root cap

Fig. 19.1 Photomicrographs of the apex of a shoot (a) and a root (b).

@)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

(111) Lateral Meristems

Lateral meristems are cylinders of dividing cells. They are present in dicots and
gymnosperms. Vascular and cork cambium are the examples of lateral meristem. They
play an important role in the increase in diameter of stem and root and in secondary
growth are determinate i.e. they grow to certain size and then stop e.g. leaves, flowers
and fruits; while others are indeterminate i.e. they- grow by meristems that continually
replenish themselves, remaining youthful e.g. vegetative root and stem.

Types of Growth:
(i) Primary Growth : Primary’ tissue is added by the apical meristem

(ii) Secondary Growth : Secondary tissue is added by the intercalary or vascular
cambium leading to increase in thickness.

Phases of Growth : Growth of multicellular plant is divided into four phases, cell
division, elongation, maturation and differentiation.

During cell division, the number of cells increase by mitosis. It occurs at the tip of root
and shoot where cells are small, have spherical nuclei lying in the center of cytoplasm,
which is non-vacuolated. As a result of cell division, each daughter cell proceeds to
enlarge. Synthesis of cytoplasm and cell wall material also takes place in this zone.

A little distance from apex of root and shoot lies the zone of elongation and is only
of few millimeters in length. During elongation the cell volume increases upto 150 fold
due to uptake of water. Plasticity of the cell wall increases and wall pressure is reduced.
Synthesis of new cytoplasm and cell wall material proceeds on.

During maturation, the final size of a given type of a cell is attained.The cells which

develop into pith, cortex and certain other tissues do not elongate further along the
axis, while other cells like fibers and tracheids elongate lengthwise more than in other

direction.

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

When the cell enlargement ceases, the process of differentiation starts. During this
growth phase the walls of cells become thicker, the walls of many kinds of cells and
tissues become pitted; thickening appear on the walls of xylem vessels, cells of various
tissues differ in spatial dimensions and many new structural features develop. (Fig
19.2)

Conditions of Growth

The growth rate is influenced by number of factors both external and internal.
External factors are temperature, light, oxygen, carbon dioxide, water, nutrition etc.
while internal factors are hormones, vitamins etc.

Endodermis

pericycle
loem
Zone of
maturation
Epidermis
root hair
Vascular cylinder
Zone of
elongation
Zone of
cell division

Fig. 19.2 The root tip is divided into four zones.

©)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

(A) Externa! factors

(i) Temperature : Temperature influences the rate of growth within a certain range (0-35°C).
Normally rate of growth increases with rise of temperature and decreases with decrease
in temperature. For maximum growth, the optimum temperature is 25-30°C and it is least
at 5-10°C. But at a very high temperature (35-40°C), the rate of growth stops and the plant
may die.

(ii) Light : Light plays very important role in the growth of plants. By light, we mean the
fractions of light, which is absorbed by plant during photosynthesis. Generally, light influences
growth in three ways; intensity, quality and duration.

The increase in intensity of light increases the number of cell divisions. The red light favours
elongation of cells and blue light enhances cell division but retards cell enlargement. Similarly,
ultraviolet rays also retard cell elongation. Duration of light affects the growth of vegetative
and reproductive structures. It also plays a role in inducing or suppressing flowering. The
phenomenon is termed as photoperiodism.

(iii) Oxygen : For successful growth, regular supply of oxygen is necessary. Without
oxygen, no metabolic activity is possible and no growth takes place. A very high

supply of oxygen however, inhibits growth.

(iv) Carbon Dioxide : We know carbon dioxide is essential for carrying out normal
process of photosynthesis but a very high concentration of it can retard growth.

(v) Water : By absorbing water, the cells elongate. The plant growth ceases in the
absence of water.

(vi) Nutrition : Nutrients supply energy to growing plants. With the increase in nutrition,
growth increases, whereas decrease in nutrition causes retardation of growth.

©)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
(B) Internal Factors

(i) Hormones : Plant hormones also influence growth e.g. Indole-3-acetic acid / (IAA)
causes elongation of cells.

(ii) Vitamins : Vitamins are orgasmic compounds synthesized within the plant bodies
in the presence of light. If the plants are grown in dark, the vitamin deficiencies are
induced and growth of plant body ceases.

Cork cambium—— Bark
—

Vascular cambium —————» Xylem
——————* Phloem

Leaf primordia Leaves
Shoot apical = Bud primordia Wy, Lateral shoots
Zygote —» Embryo meristern shoot elongation
—> Corkcambiums  —+ Bark
Root apical — Vascular cambium __p Xylem

meristem —? Phioem
—p Pericycle ——pBud primordia ——+Lateral roots
Tap root

Fig. 19.3Graphic representation of growth and differentiation in plants

Differentiation

As you have studied, once a seed has germinated, the plant’s further development
depends on the activities of the meristematic tissues, and we know that shoot and root
apical meristems give rise to all cells of the adult plant. Differentiation is the formation
of specialized tissues, which can be considered to occur in plant in five stages (Fig 19.3).

Stage 1 Represents the formation of embryo.
Stage 2 Within the embryo, shoot and root apical meristems are recognized.

@

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Stage 3 Cambium is recognized, it is responsible for secondary growth.

Stage 4 There is production of leaf primordial (these are the cells committed to become
leaves, shoot or roots). Root primordia develop from the root cambium, called pericycle.
Leaf and shoot primordia develop directly from apical meristematic cells.

Stage 5 Fully differentiated tissues and structure are formed including xylem, phloem,
leaves, shoots and roots.

Growth Correlations

The development of a plant is usually correlated with its growth and different organs
growing at different rates in different directions and the development of different parts
takes place. Such reciprocal relationship is known as correlation.

One of the most important correlative effect in plants is apical dominance. In many
plants, only apical bud grows while growth is suppressed in lower axillary buds. In an
experiment, when apical bud was removed, the growth in the lower buds was inhibited.
So active shoot apex controls the development of lateral buds. Thus, the auxin of the
terminal bud is responsible for inhibiting the growth of lateral buds by a phenomenon
known as apical dominance (Fig 19.4). Later Thimann and Skoog in 1934 performed
experiments and showed that apical dominance was caused by auxin diffusing from
the apical bud which inhibited the growth of lateral shoots is called inhibitory effect.
The removal of apex releases the lateral buds from apical dominance. It is called
compensatory effect.

Research has also indicated that not only auxin causes apical dominance, cytokinins
also play important role in apical dominance and in many cases if cytokinins are
applied directly on the inhibited bud, it allows lateral buds to be released from apical
dominance. It is also seen that those plants that have dense growth of lateral branches,
have very little apical dominance. As far as practical application of apical dominance
is concerned, it plays an important role in tap root development, and the inhibition of
sprouting of lateral buds (eyes) in potato tuber by applying synthetic auxin. In the later
case, the sprouting of eyes is prevented and storing period is increased from one to

three years (Fig. 19.4).

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Apical Dominance
Dominance Released

Buds Relesed
froom inhibition

Inhibited
buds

(a) (b)

Fig. 19.4 Apical Dominance : The Influence of Auxin

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN ANIMALS

Embryology is the study of growth and differentiation undergone by an organism in
the course of its development from a single fertilized egg into a highly complex and an
independent living being like his parents.

Development is an ordered sequence of irreversible steps, with each step setting up
the necessary conditions for the next step. Since all animals are somehow related
through the process of evolution, there are some similarities in their various forms
of development. Here, we will see a broad outline of the early stages of development.
This can be described in terms of several stages, depicted below:

| Gamete formation Sperm and egg formation

v

| Fertilization Egg and sperm fuse to form zygote

sd

| Cleavage Zygote divides , blastomeres are formed.

¥

| Gastrulation | Germ layers are formed
ky

| Organogenesis Body organs formed cells interact and
differentiate
| Growth Organs increase in size ,adult body

or form attained.
Key events in animal's development

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Development of Chick

The development of chick has been taken as a basic scheme of development. It will
provide basis for understanding the early differentiation of the organ systems and the
fundamental process of body formation, which is common to all vertebrates.
Fertilization and Incubation : The chick egg (called the yolk) is surrounded by various
accessory coverings secreted by the female reproductive tract.

Fertilization is internal and normally takes place just as ovum is entering the oviduct.
The shell is secreted as the egg passes through the shell gland (the uterus).

When an egg has been laid, the development ceases unless the temperature of egg is
kept nearly up to the body temperature of the mother. In incubating eggs artificially, the
incubators are usually regulated at temperature between 36-38°C. At this temperature,
the chick completes development and is hatched on the twenty first day.

Fig. 19.5 Cleavage stages in chick

Animation 19.2: Development in Chick
Source & Credit: Backyard Chicken

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Cleavage :

Immediately after fertilization, the egg undergoes a series of mitotic divisions, called
cleavage. In bird’s egg the process of cell division is confined to the small disc of
protoplasm lying on the surface of the yolk at the. animal pole. This type of cleavage is
referred as discoidal cleavage. The cleavage furrows start in the clear cytoplasmic region
(Fig 19.5). The first two cleavage planes are vertical while the third runs horizontally
parallel to the surface and thus cuts underneath the cytoplasm and separates it from
the yolk. The successive cleavages become irregular and number of cells increase.

Morulla : Cleavage results in the formation of a rounded closely packed mass of
blastomeres. This is morula, it consists of a disc shaped mass of cells two or more
layers in thickness (blastoderm) lying close to the yolk. In the center of the blastoderm,
the cells are smaller and completely defined while those at the periphery, are flattened,
and larger.

Blastulla:

The morula stage is short-lived and soon changes into blastula and is characterized by
the presence of a segmentation cavity or blastocoele. The discoidal cap of cells above
the blastocoele is called blastoderm. The marginal area of the blastoderm in which
the cells remain undetached from the yolk and closely adherent to it is called the zone
of junction (Fig 19.6).

Blastocoel _—— Primitive

en a ~ streak

Ko LP Migrating
hs ash » _ fs: aa
S. 2 Sts," Py cells
Blastula ernest
wm YOIk

Gastrula

19.6: Blastuia and gastrula stages in embryo of chick

@)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Gastrulation : It is characterized by the movement and rearrangement of cells in the
embryo. During gastrulation, the blastoderm splits into two layers: an upper layer of
cells called epiblast, and a lower layer of cells called hypoblast. The epiblast is mainly
presumptive ectoderm and mesoderm (Fig 19.7). The hypoblast is mainly presumptive
endoderm because hypoblast cells grow outward over the surface of the yolk, then
downward around itto form the endodermal lining of a yolk sac. At this stage, the central
cells of blastoderm can be separated from the yolk, under these central cells a pool of
fluid develops, raising them off the yolk and giving the area a translucent appearance
- the area pellucida, while the peripheral part of the blastoderm where the cells lie
unseparated from the yolk is termed as area opaca, the white area that transmits
light. The upper layer of the blastoderm consists of the presumptive mesoderm and
ectoderm.

Notochord and Mesoderm Formation

In the chick, the mesodermal cells do not invaginate as in amphibians, but migrate
medially and caudally from both sides and create a mid line thickening called primitive
streak (which grows rapidly in length as more and more presumptive mesodermal
cells continue to aggregate in the middle. All this results in the change of shape of
blastoderm, (it changes from circular to pear shaped).

Animation 19.2: Mesoderm Formation

NSW Embryology

@)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Primitive streak
Migrating cells

Blastocoel
: im Epiblast

18 hours
Yolk
Hypoblast
Subgerminal space
Neural groove Notochord
Superhicial
Se — oy ectoderm
25 hours Sate ae =
Yolk —— Heart
rudiments
Neural tube Foreqgut
28 hours

ie se Coelomic

| (pericardial
| Yolk space)

These layers form Forming heart
extra-embryonic tube
membrances

Fig. 19.7 Gastrulation in the chick

The anterior end of the primitive streak is occupied by an aggregation-the . primitive
node or notochordal cells while rest of cells are mesodermal cells. Thus primitive streak
represents the dorsal and both lateral lips of blastopore.

The continuous migration of cells takes place between epiblast and hypoblast and
results in the formation of groove along the whole length of primitive streak. This is
named as primitive groove, marked on either side by thickened margins, the primitive
ridges.

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

At the cephalic end of primitive streak, closely packed cells form a local thickening
known as Hensen’s node. The Hensen’s node however, mark the site of a Somewhat
special type of invagination.

Shortly, after the primitive streak has been formed and the endoderm was well
established, cells begin to push in from the region of Hensen’s node to form the
rod like notochord in the midline beneath the ectoderm. In chick embryo of about
18 hours, notochord is one of the few prominent structural features. In sections of
embryo incubated from 18-20 hours, it is seen that ectoderm has spread and become
organized into a coherent layer of cells merging peripherally with the yolk and the
marginal area where the expanding germ layers merge with the under lying yolk is
known as germ wall and the cavity between the yolk and the endoderm which has
been called gastrocoele is now termed as primitive gut.

From Hensen’s node, dorsal mesoderm is formed and is organized into somites. The
lateral plate mesoderm is splitted into two sheet like layers viz somatic mesoderm
and splanchnic mesoderm, with a space between them. The cavity formed between
somatic and splanchnic mesoderm is coelom. Somites are seen in 25-26 hours embryo,
these are compact cell masses lying immediately lateral to neural folds.

Neurulation :

On the dorsal surface of gastrula, over the notochord, presumptive neural ectoderm
is present in the form of a band. As gastrula elongates, the band thickens to form a
neural plate. In chicks of 18 hours, neural plate was seen as a flat, thickened area of
ectoderm. In embryos of 21-22 hours, a longitudinal folding has occurred, establishing
the neural groove in the mid dorsal line, on either side of neural folds. In 24 hours
embryos, the folding of neural plate is clearly visible. The embryo is now termed as
neurula. The anterior end of the neural groove is widest and forms the future brain
and rest of portion is future spinal cord. In the meantime, the neural plate sinks and
the neural folds grow toward one another and meet in the middorsal line, fuse and
convert the neural groove into neural tube. At each end of neural tube, a small opening
called anterior and posterior neuro-pores are also seen, which close later on. With the
formation of neural tube, there is formation of central nervous system and the cavity
enclosed is known as neurocoel. This whole process is named as neurulation.

@)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Fig:19.8 Early chick embryos

Mechanisms of Development

We know that from a single celled zygote, multicellular individual is formed and zygote
contains complete information in the form of genome which has come in the form of
chromosomes from the eggs and sperms. During cleavage, zygote divides into many
cells. Each cell has full set of chromosomes and gets complete instructions from the
parents. During differentiation however some genes remain active, while others switch
off. The importance of nucleus and cytoplasm during development is revealed from
the following experiments.

1.In 1892, Hans Dietrisch, took sea urchin egg at two-cell stage, shook it apart and
Separated it into two cell. Later on, it was seen that both half embryos developed into
normal larvae. Dietrisch concluded that both these cells .

2. contained all the genetic information of the original zygote.

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Another experiment was performed by Spemann. He took salamander zygote, and
with the help of minute ligature of human hair divided the zygote into two equal
halves. The nucleus was present in one half, but the other half had no nucleus. When
the developmental process continued, it was seen that cleavage was completed in the
half containing nucleus but the anucleate half was not seen dividing. Eventually, when
nucleated side had reached a 16-cell stage, one of the cleavage nuclei crossed the
narrow cytoplasmic bridge to the anucleate side. Immediately this side started dividing.

A Nucleus
bs i.

Eqg envelope —
Gray crescent

Fig. 19.9 Soemann’s delayed nucleation experiments. Two kinds of experiments were performed. A, Hair
ligature was used to constrict an uncleaved fertilized newt egg. Both sides contained part of the gray
crescent. The nucleated side alone cleaved until a descendant nucleus crossed over the cytoplasmic bridge.
Then both sides completed cleavage and formed two complete embryos. B, Hair ligature was placed so
that the nucleus and gray crescent were completely separated. The side lacking the gray crescent became
an unorganized piece of belly tissue; the other side developed normally.

@

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

3.Spemann also performed another experiment. He separated the two halves of
embryo; both of them contained nuclei. Both these halves developed into complete
embryos. He also observed that from a 16-cell embryo even, if a single cell is separated,
it contains a complete set of genes and form a complete embryo. Through series of
experiments, Soemann also observed that sometimes it may happen that the nucleated
half can develop into abnormal ball of cells. Later studies revealed that development
depends on the position of gray crescent. Gray crescent is the pigment free area that
appears at the time of fertilization. So in the half lacking gray crescent, no further
development can take place.

On the basis of above experiments, Soemann made two conclusions.

i) All cells contain the same nuclear information.

li) Inthe gray crescent area, cytoplasm contains information essential for development.
Next question is, if all the cells contain same nuclear material, what causes the cells
to differentiate. There are two ways by which cell undergo differentiation and become
committed to particular determinative molecules.

1. During cleavage, cytoplasmic segregation of determinative takes place.

2. Induction or interaction with the neighboring cells takes place.

Role of Cytoplasm in Development

It is known that different cytoplasmic components contain different morpho genetic
determinants that are responsible for cell differentiation. These determinants are
present in blastomeres. The fertilized egg of an ascidian contains cytoplasm of five
different colours that is segregated into different blastomeres.

1. Clear cytoplasm. It produces larval epidermis.

2. Yellow cytoplasm. It gives rise to muscle cells.

3. Gray vegetal cytoplasm. It gives rise to gut.

4. Grey equatorial cytoplasm. It produces notochord and neural tube.

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Role of Nucleus in Development

Most gene controlled substances, which can easily be identified are found in the
cytoplasm, and are probably produced in it. Through experiment, it is found that
production of developmentally active substances by the nucleus itself, or its immediate
neighborhood, is, however available in some cases. One of such example is in the
multicellular alga, Acetabularia. It consists of rhizoid, which is attached to the ground,
from which arises a long stalk with an umbrella shaped cap at its top. On the basis
of structure and shape of the cap, two species of Acetabularia have been identified;
Acetabularia mediterranea, which has regular shaped cap, and A. crenulata, which has
irregular shaped cap.

[= ° , |

A mediterranea \ Cap regeneration
determined by

A.crenulata

Fig. 19.10 Nuclear control of cap structures in two species of Acetabularia.

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

There is only a single nucleus, although they may attain the size of several centimeters
or more. Haemmerling showed that if the cap is removed, a new one is regenerated.
He cut off the nucleus containing rhizome from an alga of one species (A. mediterranea)
and grafted a similar piece containing the nucleus of another species (A. crenulata).
When the cap was now removed, it was seen that the new regenerated one had the
characters of A. crenulata. So nucleus lying at the base of the alga and not the stalk
to which the regenerate was attached determined the structure of cap. It means that
irrespective of the fact to which species the cytoplasm belong, the genes were able to
express according to the type of nucleus

From all these experiments , it was concluded that both gene and cytoplasm play
important role in development . Nucleus contain all gene, which determine the
characteristics of the individual, while cytoplasm plays the role of selection of genes.

Concept of Differentiation:

A fertilized egg contains cytoplasmic components that are unequally distributed within
the egg. These different cytoplasmic components are believed to have morphogenetic
determinants that control the functioning of a specific cell type. This is now called
differentiation.Zygote contains complete information for the development of an
individual but it is difficult to see, how these cells differentiate.

In order to understand the concept of differentiation, Soemann performed a series of
experiments on amphibian embryo.

He took out piece of ectoderm from frog’s embryo and grew it in a separate dish. The
embryo from which the piece of ectoderm was removed , was unable to form normal
nervous system but has a defective nervous system. Similarly , the isolated piece did not
develop any structure even though it was active and healthy . In another experiment ,
he separated the mesoderm underlying ectoderm and folded the flap of ectoderm to
its original piece . The frog did not develop any nervous system. So it was proved that
mesoderm had some effect on the ectoderm to simulate the ectoderm cells to form

nervous system.

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Embryonic Induction

The capacity of some cells to evoke a specific development response in other is widespread
phenomenon in development. Work on embryonic induction was reported by Hans Soemann
and Hilde Mangold in 1924. They took two embryos of salamander at the gastrula stage and
removed a piece of dorsal blastopore lip from one embryo, and transplanted it into a ventral
or lateral position of another salamandar gastrula. It invaginated and developed a notochord
and somites. It also induced the second embryo to form neural tube and a complete nervous
system was formed where the dorsal balstopore lip was placed . The developing embryo had
both the grafted tissue and induced lost time. Later on, it was seen that only cells from the
dorsal lip of balstopore were capable of inducing a complete embryo. This area corresponds
to the presumptive area of notochord, somites and prechordal plate. Soemann designated
the dorsal lip area the primary organizer because it was the only tissue capable of inducing
development of secondary embryo in the host . This was called primary induction

AGING

Aging is an inevitable process and despite all the efforts to inhibit or stop it aging
process goes on. It can be defined as negative physiological changes in our body. We
identify the adult individual by the following signs of old age, all of them need not be
present e.g. loss of hair pigment , development of small pigmented areas in the skin
of face and arms, dryness and wrinkling of skin , loss of agility , increased weight due
to fat poor vision and forgetfulness , general weakness and decreased body immunity.

Degeneration of organ and tissue may also take place e.g. in joints, arthritis arises from
the degenration of cartilage , degeneration and disappearance of the elastic tissues in
the tunica media of the blood vessel result in arteriosclerosis , blood clotting in the
coronary arteries.

@)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

=)

@ Discarded mesoderm
opposite to dorsal lip

«2

Dorsal lip
donor mesocerm
from dorsal lip
Primary neural Primary notochord Secondary notochord
and neural and neural
development development

secondary neural
development

Fig. 19.11 The spemann primary organizer experiment

@2)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

The exact process of aging is still unknown , but the following points are worth
consideration.

1. The cells of tissues have only a finite number of mitotic division and hence the cells
may have reached their finite number by the time tissue or organ is fully grown. For
example in the case of nervous system, mental activity and memory deteriorate and
there are fewer nerve cells in old age.

2. Changes in intracelluar substances take place during aging . For example, collagen
acquires increased cross linkages in its protein molecules , while elastic tissues loss their
elasticity with the passage of the time . There is also hardening and loss of resilience in
dense connective tissues and cartilage.

3. | Spontaneous mutation may result in
loss of cells and degeneration of tssues .
The process of aging can be slowed down
by better nutrition and improved living
conditions e.g. regular meals, regular
exercise , adequate sleep, abstinence from
smoking and maintaining ideal weigth can
prolong life by an average of 11 years.


19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

REGENRATION

The ability to regain or recover the lost or injured part of the body is called regeneration .In
sponges due to simple organization sponges possess greate power of regeneration . These
not only replace the parts lost during injury , but any piece of the body is capabale of growing
into a complete sponge. The process, is however , very slow and requires months or years
for the complete development .

If lobster loses its pincer claw a new claw regenerates. If starfish breakes off portions of
their arms into pieces till the central disc completely devoid of arms is left , the central disc
in almost all cases and also the arms in some cases are capable of developing into separate
individuals. If head of earthworm is removed, a new head regenerates. Limb regeneration
has been studied mostly in salamanders of various ages. In these forms, the limbs are readily
regenerated throughout life, more rapidly when the amphibian is young and small. Besides
limb, other parts of the body also have considerable regeneration capacity e.g. tail in the
larva of amphibians and in lizards. For example, lizard can easily discard its tail but tail can
be regenerated by special features of its tail.

Healing of fracture and repair of a skin wound are some other examples of regeneration.
In plants, regeneration is the basis of plant propagation. Almost any part or even avery small
fragments of a plant e.g. a piece of stem or leaf or even a single tissue cell may develop” into

a full plant. A part of the stem with a few leaves may be taken from many kinds of plants and
when planted in soil form a complete plant.

Animation 19.3: Regenration
ource & Credit: |Giphy

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

In the process of regeneration, many of the various cell types which were present in the
missing part of the body are replaced by the differentiation of cells e.g. in flatworms,
and planaria the unspecialized cells, neoblasts, which are always present in the body
of adult are mobilized and migrate to the site of amputation, where they differentiate
into specialized cell types. But in other organisms like salamanders or newts some
of the specialized tissue cell types in the stump of an amputated limb apparently
dedifferentiate (become less specialized) and then proceed to differentiate into the
same and probably different types of cells.

Asexual reproduction:
fission followed by regeneration

— a,

Grows
Anterior new tail
half with
no tail
Flatworm Posterior Si
cinches in two half with Grows
no head new head

Fig:19.12 Regeneration in (a) Start fish (b) Planaria

@5)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

ABNORMAL DEVELOPMENT

Sometimes, under unfavourable conditions, some parts of the body show abnormal
development. Teratology is the branch of biology, which deals with these abnormal
developments and causes for such developments. Anything which interferes with the
normal process of development is the factor causing abnormalities.

The normal process of development is disturbed by abnormalities inherited from
parents, abnormalities due to chromosomes or genes, environmental factors or
metabolic defects.

Abnormalities are inherited from parents through abnormal or defective gene(s).
Abnormality of development is also related to the presence of defective gene on sex
chromosomes e.g. in haemophilia only males suffer from this disease. It again, depends
whether the gene is dominant or recessive, homozygous or heterozygous.

Chromosomal abnormalities result when one of the sex chromosomes (x or y) is
missing or extra and these abnormalities lead to syndromes. Kline-felter’s Syndrome
(xxy) is an example of trisomy of the sex chromosome while Turner's Syndrome (xo)
is the condition in which one of the sex chromosomes is missing. Another condition,
xyy leads to tallness, aggressiveness, mental defect and antisocial behavior. These
abnormalities arise during the formation of gametes, when these gametes unite to
from zygote.

Environmental factors causing or contributing to abnormal development are

grouped together as teratogens. lonizing radiations (e.g. x. rays) are well known for
their teratogenic action. Because, they often have their effect on the developing ovum
or spermatozoan, causing damage or changes (mutations) in the genes. Nutritional
deficiencies, absence of certain substances (e.g. vitamins and trace elements), toxins
and drugs even ingested by mother, effect the differentiation of every tissue in the
foetus. If such deficiency is high, a cell may cause death of foetus.

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Metabolic defects lead to structural deviations from the normal. During
organogenesis, when various body organs are formed, sometimes, one organ or its
part is missing or it is repeated and it can result into abnormal organs or body parts
and the individual born are malformed.

In microcephaly, the individuals are born with small skull. Individuals with cleft palate
have their upper lip folded or the individual has harelip. In conditions of the fingers in
hand or feet are more or less than five.

EXERCISE
Q1. Fill in the blanks.

(i) The influence of notochordal cells on the ectodermal cells to become nervous
system was called

(ii) is a condition in which individuals have small skull.
(iii) Growth is accompanied by two factors.
(a) by increase in (0) increase in
(iv) are the regions where growth is initiated by the proliferation of cells.

Q.2. Write whether the statement is true or false and write the correct statement
if false.

i). Primary growth leads to increase in length, while secondary growth leads to increase
in width.

li). The plants in which flowering is not at all effected by the day length are called day
neutral plants.

iii). The somatic mesoderm soon splits in the middle to form two layers

(a) Outer parietal layer (6) Inner visceral layer

iv). In the clear cytoplasmic area, cytoplasm contains information essential for
development.

v) The phase of cell movement and rearrangement is called cleavage.

@)

19. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab

Q.4 Short questions.

(i) What is organizer and inducer substance?

(ii) What is differentiation?

(iii) Define embryonic induction.

(iv) Differentiate between growth and development.
(v) What is meristem?

Q.5 Extensive questions.

(i) What is aging. How will you explain this process.

(ii) What is regeneration? Why it is so effective in some animals and missing in others?
(iii) Describe in detail the developmental processes of chick.

(iv) What is growth, discuss different phases and condition for growth?

(v) What is development, describe the principles of development in detail?

CHAPTER

2O

CHROMOSOMES AND
DNA

Animation 20:: Growth and development

Source & Credit: Wikivedia

Chromosomes are thread like structures that appear inside the nucleus at the time of cell division.
They were first observed by the German embryologist Walther Fleming in 1882, when he was
examining the rapidly dividing cells of salamander larvae. Since their discovery, chromosomes have
been found in the cells of all eukaryotes. Their number however varies from species to species.
Pencillium, afungus, has only one pair of chromosomes, while some ferns have more than 500 pairs.
A mosquito has 6, honeybee 32, corn 20, sugarcane 80, frog 26 and a mouse has 40 chromosomes.
Human cells have 46 chromosomes, consisting of 23 pairs (Fig 20.1). Each of these 46 chromosomes
contains hundreds or thousands of genes that play important roles in determining how a person's
body develops and functions. The possession of all these chromosomes is therefore, essential
for survival. Missing of a part or whole of chromosome leads to serious consequences, and death
occurs.

Fig. 20.1 Human chromosomes

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

TYPES OF CHROMOSOMES

Typically, a chromosome is made of chromatids, centromere, (primary constriction),
and a secondary constriction (Fig 20.2).

Centromere

Chromatids

WG,’

Centromere g
{primary 7 ph
Constriction) a)

Secondry ———— —f
constriction

"

ae

Sister chromatids

Fig 20.2 Structure of chromosome

Chromosomes may widely differ in appearance. They vary in size, staining properties,
the location of centromere, relative length of two arms on either side of centromere,
and the position of constricted regions along the arms. The particular array of
chromosomes that an individual possesses is called its karyotype (Fig 20.3). Karyotypes
show marked differences among species and sometimes even among individuals of
the same species.
The chromosomes are called telocentric, acrocentric, sub metacentric and metacentric
depending upon the location of centromere between the middle and tip of the
chromosomes.

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 20.3 A human karyotype

]
I

Telocentric

Acrocentric Sub metacentrie Metacentric

Fig. 20.4 Shapes of chromosomes depends upon the location of centromere

These chromosomes- acquire different shapes at the time of anaphase during cell
division. The usual shapes are i, j and v.

©

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
COMPOSITION OF CHROMOSOME

Chromosomes are composed of DNA and protein. Most are about 40% DNA and 60%
protein. A significant amount of RNA is also associated with chromosomes, because
these are the sites of RNA synthesis. The DNA of achromosome is one very long, double
stranded fiber that extends unbroken through the entire length of the chromosome.
A typical human chromosome contains about 140 million (1.4 x 108) nucleotides in
its DNA. The amount of information, one chromosome contains would fill about 280
printed books of 1000 pages each, if each nucleotide corresponds to a word and each
page had about 500 words on it. Further more, if the strand of DNA from a single
chromosome were laid out in a Straight line, it would be about 5 centimeter long.
Fitting such a strand into a small space of nucleus is nature’s marvel - and that’s only 1
of 46 chromosomes. In the cell, however, the DNA is coiled allowing it to fit into a much
smaller space than would otherwise be possible.

How can this long DNA fibre coil so tightly? If we gently disrupt a eukaryotic nucleus
and examine the DNA with an electron microscope, we find that it resembles a string
of beads (Fig 20.5). Every 200 nucleotides, the DNA duplex is coiled around a core
of eight histone proteins forming a complex known as a nucleosome. Unlike most
proteins, which have an overall negative charge, histones are positively charged due
to an abundance of the basic amino acids arginine and lysine. They are thus strongly
attracted to the negatively charged phosphate groups of the DNA. The histone cores
thus act as magnetic forms that promote and guide the coiling of the DNA. Further
coiling occurs when the string of nucleosomes wraps up into higher order coils called
Supercoils.

Highly condensed portions of the chromatin are called heterochromatin. Some of
these portions remain permanently condensed, so that their DNA is never expressed.
The remainder of the chromosome called euchromatin is condensed only during cell
division,

©)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Supercoil
| ~~ within
\y SS R=" chromosome
ee

s”

Chromosomes
Coiling
within =
supercoll Chromatin
- we? ‘a, a
WY ye Chromatin fiber
We
~~ DNA
ae Nucleosome
) Central Bs
histone} of} .//
al (] ! i I i
eo DNA double helix (duplex)

DNA

Fig. 20.5 Levels of eukaryotic chromosomal organization

when compact packaging facilitates the movement of the chromosomes. At all other
times, euchromatin is present in an open configuration and its genes can be 125
expressed. The way, chromatin is packaged when the cell is not dividing is not well
understood beyond the level of nucleosomes and is a topic of intensive research.

©)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

THE CHROMOSOMAL THEORY OF INHERITANCE

A central role for chromosomes in heredity was first suggested in 1900 by the German
geneticist Karl Correns, in one of the papers announcing the rediscovery of Mendel’s work.
Soon after, observations that similar chromosomes paired with one another during meiosis
led directly to the chromosomal theory of inheritance, first formulated by the American
Walter Sutton in 1902.

Several pieces of evidence supported Sutton’s theory. One was that reproduction involves
the initial union of only two cells, egg and sperm. If Mendel’s model was correct, then these
two gametes must make equal hereditary contributions. Sperm, however, contain little
cytoplasm, suggesting that the hereditary material must reside within the nuclei of the
gametes. Furthermore, while diploid individuals have two copies of each pair of homologous
chromosomes, gametes have only one. This observation was consistent with Mendel’s model,
in which diploid individuals have two copies of each heritable gene and gametes have one.
Finally, chromosomes segregate during meiosis, and each pair of homologue orients on the
metaphase plate independently of every other pair.

There is however one problem with this theory. If Mendelian characters are determined by
genes located on the chromosomes, and if the independent assortment of Mendelian traits
reflects the independent assortment of chromosomes in meiosis, why does the number of
characters that assort independently in a given kind of organism often greatly exceed the
number of chromosome pairs the organism possesses? This has led many early researchers
to have serious reservations about Sutton’s theory.

In 1910 Thomas Hunt Morgan, studying the fruit fly, Drosphila melanogaster, detected a
mutant male fly, one that differed strikingly from normal flies of the same species its eyes
were white instead of red.

Morgan crossed mutant male to a normal female. All F, progeny had red eyes. He
then crossed red eyed flies from F, generation with each other. Of the 4252 F, progeny
Morgan examined, 782 (18%) had white eyes. Although the ratio of red eyes to white
eyes in the F, progeny was greater than 3:1, the results of the cross nevertheless
provided clear evidence that eye colour segregates.

@

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

X chromosome with white-eye gene
¥ ch ae X chromosome with

red-eye gene
ee ‘ies ‘Parents, ft -
|

h
aN Male lids f

\ eb el aoe

.@ x
ih ‘Male re ie \

i generation

ir i is
ip dD

Males ‘Females

Fig. 2Q.6 Morgan’s experiment demonstrating the chromosomal basis of Sex linkage.

However, there was something about the outcome that was strange and totally
unpredicted by Mendel’s theory - all of the white eyed F, flies were male!

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

How could this result be explained? Perhaps it was impossible for a white eyed female
fly to exist; such individuals might not be viable for some unknown reason. To test this
idea, Morgan test crossed the female F, progeny with the original white eyed male. He
obtained both white-eyed and red-eyed males and females in a 1:1:1:1 ratio, just as
Mendelian theory predicted. Hence a female could have white eyes. Why, then were
there no white eyed females among the progeny of the original cross?

The solution to this puzzle involved sex. The gene causing the white eye trait in
Drosophila resides only on the X chromosome. It is absent from the Y chromosome. A
trait determined by a gene on the X chromosome is Said to be sex linked. Knowing that
the white eye trait is recessive to the red eye trait, the Morgan’s result was a natural
consequence of the Mendelian assortment of chromosomes (Fig 20.6).

Morgan's experiment was one of the most important in the history of genetics because
it presented the first clear evidence that the genes determining Mendelian traits do
indeed reside on the chromosomes, as Sutton had proposed. The chromosome theory
of inheritance therefore, propounds that genes are located on chromosomes. The
segregation of the white-eye trait has one-to-one correspondence with the segregation
of the X chromosome, in other words, Mendelian traits such as eye colour in Drosophila
assort independently because chromosomes do.

DNA AS HEREDITARY MATERIAL

The first evidence of hereditary nature of DNA was provided by a British microbiologist
Frederick Griffith who made some unexpected observations while experimenting with
pathogenic bacteria. When he infected mice with a virulent strain of Streptococcus
pneumoniae bacteria (then known as Pneumococcus), the mice died of blood poisoning.
However, when he infected similar mice with a mutant strain of S. pneumoniae that
lacked the virulent strains polysaccharide coat, the mice showed no ill effects. The coat
was apparently necessary for virulence.

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

The normal pathogenic form of this bacterium is referred to as the S form because it
forms smooth colonies on a culture dish. The mutant forms, which lacks an enzyme
needed to manufacture the polysaccharide coat, is called the R form because it forms
rough colonies.

Heat-killed Live PathogenicLive Mixture of heat-killed
pathogenic straino _ nonpathogenic Pathogenic and live
strain of S: Pheumoniaestrain of nonpathogenic strain
S:pneumoniae S: Pneumoniae of S. Pneumoniae
Polysaccharide
He Me ee ae
r af # ix 4 #
Mice live Mice die Mice live Mice die;their blood

contains live pathogenic
strain of S. pneumoniae

Fig 20.7 Griffith’s discovery of transformation

To determine whether the polysaccharide coat itself had a toxic effect. Griffith injected
dead bacteria of the virulent S strain into the mice; the mice remained perfectly
healthy. As a control, he injected mice with a mixture containing dead S bacteria of
the virulent strain and live coatless R bacteria, each of which by itself did not harm the
mice (Fig 20.7). Unexpectedly, the mice developed the disease symptoms and many
of them died. The blood of the dead mice was found to contain high levels of live,
virulent streptococcus type S bacteria, which had surface proteins characteristic of
the live (previously R) strain. Somehow, the information specifying the polysaccharide
coat had passed from the dead, virulent S bacteria to the live, coatless R bacteria in the
mixture, permanently transforming the coatless R bacteria into the virulent S variety.
Transformation is the transfer of. genetic material from one cell to another and can
alter the genetic make up of the recipient cell.

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

The agent responsible for transforming Streptococcus went undiscovered until 1944.
In a classic series of experiments, Oswald Avery along with Colin Macleod and

Maclyn McCarty characterized what they referred to as the “Transforming principle”.
They first prepared mixture of dead S Streptococcus and live R Streptococcus that
Griffith had used. Then they removed as much of the protein as they could from
their preparation, eventually achieving 99.98% purity. Despite removal of nearly all
the protein, the transforming activity was not reduced. Moreover, the properties of
transforming principle resembled those of DNA. The protein digesting enzymes or RNA
digesting enzymes did not affect the principle’s activity, but the DNA digesting enzyme
DNase destroyed all the transforming activity.

Additional evidence supporting Avery’s conclusion was provided in 1952 by Alfred
Hershey and Martha Chase who experimented with bacteriophages T2. In some
experiments they labelled viruses with radio isotope 32P, which was incorporated into
the newly synthesized DNA of grooving phage. In other experiments, the viruses were
grown on a medium containing 35S, an isotope of sulphur which is incorporated into
the amino acids of newly synthesized protein coats.

After the labelled viruses were permitted to infect bacteria, the bacterial cells were
agitated violently to remove the protein coats of the infecting viruses from the surfaces
of the bacteria. This procedure removed nearly all of the 35S label from the bacteria.
However the 32P label had transferred to the interior of the bacteria (Fig 20.8) and
was found in viruses subsequently released from the infected bacteria. Hence, the
hereditary information injected into the bacteria that specified the new generation

of viruses was DNA and not protein.

Animation 20.2: DNA

ource & Credit: \Mr.Birnbaum’s Biology

©)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Mi op a DNA labeled with *2P

T2 bacteriophages
are labeled with
radioactive isotopes

bacteriophages infect
v bacterial cells v

bacterial cells are agitated
to remove viral protein coats

5S radioactivity 2P radioactivity found
found in the medium in the bacterial cells

Fig 20.8 the Hershey and chase experiment

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Chemical Nature of DNA

A German Chemist, Friedrich Miescher, discovered DNA in 1869, only four

years after Mendel’s work was published. Miescher extracted a white substance from
the nuclei of human cells and fish sperm. He called this substance “nuclein” because it
seemed to be specifically associated with the nucleus.

Since nuclein was acidic, it came to be known as nucleic acid. For 50 years biologists
did little research on the substance, because nothing was known of its function in cells.
In 1920's, the basic structure of nucleic acids was determined by the biochemist P.A.
Levene, who found that DNA contains three main components (Fig 20.9) : (1) phosphate
(PO4) groups, (2) five carbon sugars, and (3) nitrogen containing bases called purines
(adenine, A, and guanine, G) and pyrimidines (thymine, T and cytosine, C, RNA contains
uracil, U instead of T). Levene concluded that DNA and RNA molecules are made of
repeating units called nucleotides. In a nucleotide nitrogen base is attached to carbon
number 1 of a pentose sugar and phosphate group is attached to carbon number 5 of
the sugar. In addition a free hydroxyl (-OH) group is attached to the 3’ carbon atom (Fig
20.10). The 5 ‘phosphate and 3’ hydroxyl groups allow DNA and RNA to form long chains
of nucleotides, because these two groups can react chemically with each other. The
reaction between the phosphate group of one nucleotide and the hydroxyl group of
another is a dehydration synthesis, eliminating a water molecule and forming a covalent
bond that links the two groups (Fig 20.11). The linkage is called a phosphodiester bond
because the phosphate group is now linked to the two sugars by means of a pair of
ester (P-O-C) bonds. The two unit polymer resulting from this reaction still has a free
5’ phosphate group at one end and a free 3’ hydroxyl group at the other, so that it can
link to other nucleotides. In this way, many thousands of nucleotides can join together
in long chains. Linear strands of DNA or RNA no matter how long, will almost always
have a free 5’ phosphate group at one end and a free 3’hydroxyl group at the other.

@)

Punjab

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.

H H
HO-c Ho OH HO-C Ho
we, ALY,
OH H OH OH
Deoxyribose 9 Ribose
(OMY) HO-P-O- (RINE Only) Fig 20.10 Numbering
the carbon atoms in a

NH» O-
Epoeniaales ncleoties

yo _N Se
NOONE H2N Po,
| Adenine H cee i ] .

Purines
NH» QO 3

OH

OH =

| | i
Of OR ONAOH * oro
H H Uracil — Thymi ine Oo Gaal
Cytosine RNA onl DNA onl vi <

Pyrimidines

Fig 20.11 A phosphodiester

Fig 20.9 Nucleotide subunits of DNA and bond.

RNA

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Ul

Erwin Chargaff later showed that the amount of adenine in DNA always equals the
amount of thymine, and the amount of guanine always equals the amount of cytosine.
It also implies that there is always equal proportion of purine (A+G) and pyrimidine
(C+T).

The significance of the regularities pointed out by Chargaff became obvious when a
British chemist Rosalind Franklin carried on an X-ray diffraction analysis of DNA.In
this analysis, a molecule is bombarded with a beam of X- rays. When individual rays
encounter atoms their path is bent or diffracted and the diffraction pattern is recorded
on the photographic film. When carefully analyzed this pattern gives three dimensional
structure of a molecule.

Rosalind Franklin prepared this X- ray diffraction pattern of DNA in the laboratory of
British Biochemist Maurice Wilkins, who prepared DNA fibers. The diffraction pattern
suggested that the DNA molecule had a shape of a helix with a diameter of 2nm anda
complete helical turn every 3.4 nm (Fig 20.12).

Double Helical Structure of DNA (Watson and Crick’s Model)

Learning informally of Franklin’s results, before they were published in 1953, James
Watson and Francis Crick, two young researchers in University’ of Cambridge, quickly
worked out a likely structure of the DNA molecule (Fig 20.12) which we now know
was substantially correct. They’ proposed that molecule is a simple double helix, with
the basis of two strands pointed inward toward each other. forming base-pairs. In
their model, base pairs always consist of purines, which are large, pointing toward
pyrimidines which are small, keeping the diameter of the molecule a constant 2 nm.
Because hydrogen bonds exist between the bases in a base pair, the double helix is
Stabilized as a duplex DNA molecule composed of two antiparallel strands, one chain
running 3’ to 5’ and the other 5’ to 3’. The base pairs are planar (flat) and stack 0.34nm
apart as a result of hyperphobic interactions contributing to the overall stability of
the molecule (Fig. 20.3). In the double helix, adenine forms two hydrogen bonds with
thymine, while guanine forms three hydrogen bonds with cytosine. Adenine will not form
proper hydrogen bonds with cytosine.and guanine will not form hydrogen bonds with
thymine. Consequently adenine and thymine will always occur in the same proportion
in any DNA molecule, as well guanine and cytosine, because of this base pairing.

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab


20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Sugar-phosphate?

“backbone.

Hydrogen bonds :
between altregenows sp
bases \

y bond
5' end eC

Fig 20.13 DNA is a double helix

DNA Replication

ee -£ eX d preaahareatt

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

The Watson - Crick model immediately suggested that the basis for copying the genetic
information is complementarity. If one were to unzip the molecule, one would need
only to assemble the appropriate complementary nucleotides on the exposed single
Strands to form two daughter complexes with the same sequences. This form of DNA
replication is called semi-conservative, because while the sequence of the original
duplex is conserved after one round of replication, the duplex itself is not. Instead,
each strand of the duplex becomes part of another duplex. In semi-conservative
replication, the two133 strands of the duplex separate out each acting as a model or
mold, along which new nucleotides are arranged thus giving rise to two new duplexes.
In this process by separation of two strands, primary structure has been conserved,
whereas the secondary structure has been disrupted.

The other hypotheses of DNA replication were also proposed. The conservative model
Stated that the parental double helix would remain intact and generate DNA copies
consisting of entirely new molecules. The dispersive model predicted that parental
DNA would become completely dispersed and that each strand of all the daughter
molecules would be a mixture of old and new DNA.

Animation 20.3: DNA Replication

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

The Meselson - Stahl Experiment

The three hypothesis of DNA replication were evaluated by Mathew Meselson and

Franklin Stahl of the California Institute of Technology in 1958. They grew bacteria in
a medium containing heavy isotope of nitrogen, '°N, which became incorporated into
the bases of the bacterial DNA. After several generations, the DNA of these bacteria
was denser than that of bacteria grown in a medium containing the lighter isotope of
nitrogen, N'*. Meselson and Stahl then transferred the bacteria from the N'? medium
to the N'4 medium and collected the DNA at various intervals.
They dissolved the DNA in cesium chloride and then spun it at a very high speed in
an ultra-centrifuge. DNA strands of different densities got separated. The enormous
centrifugal forces generated by the ultracentrifuge caused the cesium ions to migrate
toward the bottom of the centrifuge tube, creating a gradient of CsCl, and thus of
density. Each DNA floats or sinks in the gradient until it reaches the position where its
density exactly matches the density of cesium there. Because N'° strands are denser
than N"* strands, they migrate farther down the tubes to a denser region of the cesium
chloride gradient.

Bottom of tube

Rounds of
replications

Top of
tuble

N'°band 0

Hybrid
band

Hybrid
band
+N"* band

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 20.14 The key result of the Meselson and Stahl experiment. The bands on the left side of
the figure sTiow N 1’ DNA which is heavier and is present towards the bottom of the tube. The
middle band is a hybrid DNA band of N1’ and NM and hence lies above the Nir band. This is
after first round of replication. In the second round of replication, two bands are \isible one at
the lex el of hybrid band and the other lighter band which is N" band.

The DNA collected immediately after the transfer, was all dense. However, after the
bacteria completed their first round of DNA replication in the N '* medium, the density
of their DNA had decreased to a value intermediate between N'*- DNA and N’ - DNA.
After the second round of replication, two density classes of DNA were observed one
intermediate and one equal to that of N'*- DNA (Fig 20.14).

Meselsonand Stahlinterpreted their results as follows: after the first round of replication,
each daughter DNA duplex was a hybrid possessing one of the heavy strands of parent
molecule and one light strand. When this hybrid duplex replicated, it contributed one
heavy strand to form another hybrid duplex and one light strand to form a light duplex
(Fig 20.15). Thus, this experiment clearly confirmed the prediction of the Watson-Crick
model that DNA replicates in a semi-conservative manner.

Animation 20.3: Meselson-Sathl Experiment
Source & Credit: weloveteaching|

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

1 Bacteria were grown in
a medium containing a
heavy isotop of nitrogen

DNA
Bacterial cell op
“a

? Bacteria were then allowed

to grow ina mediumcontaining
a light isotop of nitrogen

ample at 4 |
20minutes

“ey : a
SP, 3 At various times,the

DNA from bacterial
cell was extracted

mple at

0 minutes 3 Sample at

40 minutes

ay

:

] _ 4 The DNA was suspended
t in acesium chloride solution

waa iets Centrifugation

1 > W 3 A

Control group Labeled parent F1generationDNA F2 generation DNA(one

(unlabeled DNA) DONA (both strands (only heavy/jight unlabeled molecule,one
heavy ) hybrid molecule) heavy/light hybird molecule

Fig 20.15 The Meselson and stahl experiment : evidence demonstrting sei-conservative replication

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

The Replication Process

The DNA replication begins at one or more sites on the DNA molecule, where there
is a specific sequence of nucleotides (Fig 20.16), The DNA polymerase III and other
enzymes begin a complex process that catalyzes the addition of nucleotides to the
growing complementary strands of DNA (Fig 20.17).

Flg 20.16 Origins of replication

Fig 20.18 Molecular structure of DNA polymerse III
comle

@2)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

There are three DNA polymerases namely |, II and Ill in bacteria. DNA polymerase |
is a relatively small enzyme that plays a supporting role in DNA replication. The true
E.coli replicating enzymes is DNA polymerase III which is 10 times larger and far more
complex in structure (Fig 20.18). The enzyme is a dimer and catalyzes replication of
one DNA strand. Polymerase III progressively threads the DNA through the enzyme
complex, moving at a rapid rate, some 1000 nucleotides / second. One of the features
of the DNA polymerase ITI is that it can add nucleotides only to a chain of nucleotides
that is already paired with the parent strands. Hence DNA polymerase cannot initiate
synthesis on its own. Instead another enzyme, primase, constructs an RNA primer, a
sequence of about 10 RNA nucleotides complementary to the parent DNA template.
DNA polymerase IIIrecognizes the primer and adds DNA” nucleotides to it to construct
the DNA strands. The RNA nucleotides in the primers are then replaced by DNA
nucleotides.

Ste
a" “ror

eo
CL First subunit of
| ia DNA ars merase Ill
Leading Ose, Single-strand
strand nae Oe —. binding proteins parental
hee DNA helix
Okazaki RNA eer
fragment primers. ' WIIOODLO xe,
Lagging en mt pg, 3 Helicase
strand <0 ay ‘ nt rimase
fi second subunit of
s! “fo Lf DNA ligase DNA polymerase III

DNA polymerase |

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Another feature of DNA polymerase Ill is that it can add nucleotides only to the 3’ end of a
DNA strand. This means that replication always proceeds 5’ —» 3’ direction ona growing
DNA strand. Because the two parent strands of a DNA molecules are antiparallel, the
new strands are oriented in opposite directions (Fig 20.19). Therefore, the new strands
must be elongated by different mechanisms. Leading strand, which elongates toward
the replication fork, is built up simply by adding nucleotides continuously to its growing
3’ end. In contrast the lagging strand which elongates away from the replication fork,
is synthesized discontinuously as a series of short segments that are later connected.
These segments, called Okazaki fragments are about 100 - 200 nucleotides long in
eukaryotes and 1000 - 2000 nucleotides long in prokaryotes. Each Okazaki fragment
is synthesized by DNA polymerase III in 5’ -> 3’ direction, beginning at the replication
fork and moving away from it. When the polymerase reaches the 5’ end of the lagging
Strand, another enzyme, DNA ligase, attaches the fragment to the lagging strand. The
DNA is further unwound, new RNA primers are constructed, and DNA polymerase
Ill then jumps ahead 1000 - 2000 nucleotides (toward the replication fork) to begin
constructing another Okazaki fragment.

WHAT IS A GENE?

Archibald Garrod and William Bateson concluded in 1902 that certain diseases
among their patients were more prevalent in particular families. By examining several
generations of these families, Garrod found that some of the diseases behaved as if
they were the product of simple recessive alleles. He concluded that these disorders
were Mendelian traits and that they had resulted from changes in the hereditary
information in an ancestor of the affected families.

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Garrod investigated several of these disorders in detail. In alkaptonuria the patients
produced urine that contained homogentisic acid. This substance oxidized rapidly
when exposed to air, turning the urine black. In normal individuals, homogentisic acid
is broken down into simpler substances. With considerable insight Garrod concluded
that patients suffering from alkaptonuria lacked the enzyme necessary to catalyze
this breakdown. He speculated that many other inherited diseases might also reflect
enzyme deficiencies.

From Garrod’s finding, it could be inferred that the information encoded within the
DNA of chromosomes acts to specify particular enzymes. This point was not actually
established, however, untill 1941, when a series of experiments by Stanford University
geneticists George Beadle and Edward Tatum provided definitive evidence on this point.
Beadle and Tatum deliberately set out to create Mendelian mutations in chromosomes
and then studied the effect of these mutations on the organisms (Fig 20.20).

Beadle and Tatum exposed Neurospora spores to X-rays, expecting that DNA in some
of these spores would experience damage in the regions encoding the ability to make
compounds needed for normal growth (Fig 20.20). DNA changes of this kind are called
mutations and the organisms that have undergone such changes are called mutants.
Initially, they allowed the progeny of the irradiated spores to grow on a defined medium
containing all of the nutrients necessary for growth, so that any growth deficient
mutants resulting from the irradiation would be kept alive.

To determine whether any of the progeny of the irradiated spores had mutations
causing metabolic deficiencies, Beadle and Tatum placed subcultures of individual
fungal cells on a “minimal” medium that contained only sugar, ammonia, salts, a few
vitamins and water. Cells that had lost the ability to make other compounds necessary
for growth would not survive on such a medium. Using this approach, Beadle and
Tatum succeeded in identifying and isolating many growth deficient mutants.

@5)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Next the researchers added various chemicals to the minimal medium in an attempt
to find one that would enable a given mutant strain to grow. This procedure allowed
them to pinpoint the nature of the biochemical deficiency that strain had. The addition
of arginine, for example, permitted several mutant strains, dubbed arg mutants, to
grow. When their chromosomal positions were located, the arg mutations were found

to cluster in three areas.
ih f X-ray of ultaviolet light

= eS
Wikdtype | | Sie ee
Neurospora | i aie
- / a
Asxual 8 ices
spores x |
menieie bs Growth
Medium on complete
5 medium
Products of —_{ Base ee,
one melosis Meiosis —
Select one of — \
the spores 4
‘att
Test on minimal Grown on
Bebintirtt io Soret = complete medium

SS ZA = = = —
ae

re “Minimal media Sess java: Se

; = ¥ 2 & Ss = = =
Pyrkdoan Choline delet eic Arana: Riboflavine poser
Folic
p-Amino Inositol acid Niacin Tiere

benzoic aci

Fig 20.20 Beadle and Tatum’s procedure for isolating nutritional mutats in Neurospora

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

One - gene / one - polypeptide Hypothesis

For each enzyme in the arginine biosynthetic pathway, Beadle and Tatum were able
to isolate a mutant strain with a defective form of that enzyme, and the mutation
was always located at one of a few specific chromosomal sites. Most importantly,
they found there was a different site for each enzyme. Thus, each of the mutant they
examined had a defect in a single enzyme, caused by a mutation at a single site on
one chromosome. Beadle and Tatum concluded that genes produce their effects by
specifying the structure of enzymes and that each gene encodes the structure of one
enzyme (Fig 20-21). They called this relationship one - gene / one - enzyme hypothesis.
Because many enzymes contain multiple protein or polypeptide subunits, each encoded
by a separate gene, the hypothesis is today more commonly referred to as “one gene
/ one- polypeptide”.

Cromosome

G Gene Gene
dete 4 cluster ? cluster 3

eel

Encoded
enzyme

P:Ae (Oe F Enzyms 6) (Enzyme H
Grayme®) asym)

pata holies in
aso emical
way

|Glutamate»— |Ornithine>

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Enzymes are responsible for catalyzing the synthesis of all the parts of an organism.
They are also responsible for the assembly of nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates
and lipids. Therefore, by encoding the structure of enzymes and other proteins, DNA
specifies the structure of the organism itself.

How DNA encodes protein structure?

In 1953, an English biochemist Frederick Sanger, described the complete sequence of
amino acids of insulin. Sanger’s achievement was significant, as it was demonstrated
for the first time that proteins consisted of definable sequences of amino acids. Soon it
was revealed that all enzymes and other proteins are strings of amino acids arranged
in a certain definite order.

Following Sanger’s pioneering work, Vernon Ingram in 1956 discovered the molecular
basis of sickle cell anemia, a protein defect inherited as a Mendelian disorder. By
analyzing the structure of normal and sickle cell haemoglobin, Ingram, working at
Cambridge University, showed that sickle cell anemia is caused by a change from
glutamic acid to valine at a single position in the protein (Fig 20.22). The alleles of the
gene encoding hemoglobin differed only in their specification of this one amino acid in
the hemoglobin amino acid chain.

These experiments and other related ones have finally brought us to a clear
understanding of the unit of heredity. The characteristics of sickle cell anemia and most
other hereditary traits are defined by changes in protein structure brought about by an
alteration in the sequence of amino acids that make up the protein. This sequence in
turn is dictated by the order of nucleotides in a particular region of chromosome. For
example, the critical change leading to sickle cell disease is a mutation that replaces a
single thymine with an adenine at the position that codes for glutamic acid converting
the position to valine. The sequence of nucleotides that determines the amino acid
sequence of a protein is called a gene.

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Noerial homonlonin 5 ensity Glutamic Glutamic
Valine~ Histidine (Leucine -\Threonine ~Proline-- sciq ~ acid

Sickl ll ia h lobin B chai
IChIe Cell anemia nemogionoin cna _ ae — Glutamic
acid

Valine — Histidine Leucine — Threonine —Proline

Fig 20.22 The necular basic of a hereditary disease , sickle cell anemia

CELLS USE RNA TO MAKE PROTEIN

All organisms use the same basic mechanism of reading and expressing genes, which
is often referred to as central dogma. The genetic information resides in DNA, which
is also the main fountain head. The genetic information flows down into RNA, which is
then converted into protein (Fig 20.23).

The first step of central dogma is the transfer of information from DNA to RNA, which
occurs when an MRNA copy of the gene is produced. The process is called transcription.
Transcription is initiated when the enzyme RNA polymerase binds to a particular binding’
site called a prom oter located upstream of the gene. The enzyme then moves along
the strand into the gene and mRNA is synthesized. At stop signal on the other end of
gene, the enzyme disengages itself from the DNA and releases the newly assembled
RNA chains. This chain is a complementary transcript of the gene from which it was
copied.

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

The second step of the central dogma is the transfer of information from RNA to
proteins, which occurs when the information contained in the mRNA is used to direct
the synthesis of polypeptides by ribosomes. This process is called translation, because
the nucleotide sequence of the MRNA is translated into an amino acid sequence in the

polypeptide.
The two steps of central dogma taken together are also means of gene expression.

ranslation

Protein

Fig. 20.23 The central dogma of gene expression.

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Three types of RNA

The class of RNA found in ribosome is called ribosomal RNA (rRNA). During translation,
rRNA provides the site where polypeptides are assembled. In addition to rRNA, there
are two other major classes of RNA in the cells : transfer RNA (tRNA) and messenger
RNA (mRNA). Transfer RNA molecules transport the amino acids to the ribosomes for
use in building the polypeptides and also position each amino acid at the correct place
on the elongating polypeptide chain (Fig 20.24). Human cells contain about 45 different
kinds of tRNA molecules. Messenger RNA are long strands of RNA that are transcribed
from DNA and that travel to the ribosomes to direct precisely which amino acids are
assembled into polypeptides.

Anticodon

Fig. 20.24 The structure of tRNA
(a) two-dimensional schematic
(b) three dimensional structure.

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Transcription

This is the process in which an RNA copy of the DNA sequence encoding the gene is
produced with the help of an enzyme, RNA polymerase. Only one of the two strands
of DNA are transcribed. This strand is called template strand or the antisense strand.
Thq opposite strand is called coding strand or the sense strand. The RNA polymerase
enzymes synthesize RNA from 5’ —» 3’ direction. There is only one type of RNA
polymerase in prokaryote which is responsible for the synthesis of all the three types
of RNAs viz. rRNA, mRNA and tRNA. On the other hand there are three types of RNA
polymerases in eukaryotes namely RNA polymerase I, which synthsize rRNA, RNA
polymerase II, which synthesizes mRNA and RNA polymerase III which synthesizes
tRNA.

Transcription starts at the RNA polymerase binding site called promoter on the DNA
template strand. In prokaryotes within promoter there are two binding sites TTGACA
also called -35 sequence and TAT AAT sequence also called -10 sequence, which have
affinity for the RNA polymerase. In eukaryotes these sites are at -75 and -25 sites,
respectively

The binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter is the first step in gene transcription.
One ofthe subunits of RNA polymerase sigma factor, is responsible for correctinitiation
of transcription process. Once the transcription has started the sigma factor is released
and the remaining part of the enzyme (core enzymes) moves over template; strand
and completes the transcription of the gene. The DNA strands open up at the place
where enzyme is attached to the templete strand forming transcription bubble. The
transcription bubble moves down the DNA, leaving the growing strand protruding
from the bubble (Fig 20.25). The stop sequences at the end of the gene terminate the
synthesis of MRNA. The simplest stop signal is a series of GC base pairs followed by a
series of AT base pairs. The RNA formed in this region forms a GC hairpin (Fig 20.27)
followed by four or more U ribonucleotides. The hairpin causes RNA polymerase to

stop synthesis.

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 20.25 Model of a transcription bubble.

In bacteria the newly synthesized mRNA is directly released into the pytoplasm, when it
is converted into polypeptide chain. In eukaryotes however, it has to travel long distance
from inside the nucleus to ribosomes outside in the cytoplasm. The eukaryotic MRNA
is therefore modified in several ways to aid this journey. A cap and a tail is added so
that the molecule may remain stable during long journey to ribosome. The cap is in the
form of 7 methyl GTP, which is linked 5’ to 5’ with the first nucleotide, whereas tail is in
the form of poly A tail linked to 3’ end of the RNA. These caps and tails save the MRNA
from variety of nucleases and phosphatases.

GENETIC CODE

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Genetic code is a combination of 3 nucleotides, which specify a particular amino acid.
There are three nucleotides in .a codon, because a two nucleotide codon would not
yield enough combinations to code for the 20 different amino acids that commonly
occur in proteins. With four DNA nucleotides (G,C, T and A) only 42 or 16, different pairs
of nucleotides could be formed. However, these same nucleotides can be arranged in
43 or 64 different combinations of three, more than enough to code for the 20 amino
acids. The genetic code is a triplet code and the reading occurs continuously without
punctuation between the three nucleotide units.

After Crick’s initial experiments, Marshall Nirenberg, Philip Leader and Har Gobind
Khorana tested all the 64 codons by making artificial mRNAs and triplet codons and
using them to synthesize a protein or aminoacyl-tRNA complexes in cell free systems. '

The full genetic code was determinal during m id 60s (Table 20.1). Out of 64 codons,
three codons UAA, UAG and UGA do not code for any amino acid and hence are known
as nonsense codons. These codons are usually present at the end of the gene and
hence are also called stop codons. Every gene starts with initiation codon AUG, which
encodes the amino acid methionine.

Table 20.1 The Genetic Code

Second Letter

First letter U Cc A G Third letter

U UUU phenylalanine UCU Serine UAU Tryosine UGU Cysteine U
UUC UCC UAC Cc

UGC
UUA Leucine UCA UAA Stop UGA Stop A
UCG UAG UGG

UUG Stop Tryptophan

C CUU Leucine CCU Proline CAU Histidine CGU Arginine U
CUC CCC CAC CGC Cc
CUA CCA CAA Glutamine CGA A
CUC CCG CAG CGG G

A AUU Isoleucine ACU Treonine 44U Asparagine “AGU Serine U
AUC ACC AAC AGC C
AUA Methionine; ACA AAA Lysine AGA Arginie A
AUG ACG AAG AGG G

Start

G GUU Valine GCU Alanine  GAU Aspartate ¢GY Glycine U
GUC GCC GAC GGC C
GUA GCA GAA Glutamate GGA A
GUG GCG GAG GGG G

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

The genetic code is universal. Itis the same in almost all the organisms. For example AGA
specifies arginine in bacteria, in humans and all other organisms whose genetic code
has been studied. Because of the universality of codon, the genes can be transferred
from one organism to another and be successfully transcribed and translated in their
new host.

The study of genetic code of mitochondrial DNA however, showed that genetic code is
not that universal. For example UGA codon is normally astop codon but, in mitochondria
it reads as tryptophan. Likewise AUA was read as methionine instead of isoleucine
and AG A and AGG for termination of protein synthesis is instead of arginine. Thus it
appearsthatgenetic code is not quite universal.

TRANSLATION

In prokaryotes, translation begins when the initial portion of an MRNA molecule binds
to rRNA molecule in a ribosome. The mRNA lies on the ribosome in such a way that
only one of its codons is exposed at the polypeptide site at any time.

A tRNA molecule possessing the complementary three nucleotide sequence or
anticodon, binds to the exposed codon on the mRNA. As the ribosome moves along
the messenger RNA, successive codons on the MRNA are exposed and the series of
tRNA m olecules bind one after another to the exposed codons. Each of these tRNA
m olecules carries an attached amino acid, w hich is added to the end of the grow ing
polypeptide chain.

Particular tRNA molecules become attached to specific amino acids through the action
of activating enzymes called aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, one of which exists for each
of the 20 common amino acids (Fig 20.26).

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Tryptophan
attached ta
Antlicodan tRAWA

(RNA binds toliGG
codon of mRNA

Fig. 20.26 Activating enzymes “read” the genetic code.

In prokaryotes, polypeptide synthesis begins with the formation of initiation complex
(Fig. 20.27). First a tRNA molecule carrying a chemically modified methionine (called
N-formyl methionine) binds to the small ribosomal subunit. Proteins called initiation
factor position the tRNA on the ribosomal surface at the P site (peptidyl site) where
peptide bonds will form. Nearby two other sites will form. A site (for aminoacyl site),
where successive amino acid bearing tRNAs will bind and the E site (for exit site) where
empty tRNAs will exit the ribosome (Fig 20.27). This initiation complex, guided by
another initiation factor, binds to AUG on the MRNA.

After the initiation complex has formed, the large ribosome subunit bindstRNA molecule
with the appropriate anticodon appears, proteins called elongation factors assist in
binding it to the exposed mRNA codon at the A site. The two amino acids which now he
adjacent to each other undergo a chemical reaction, catalyzed by the large ribosomal
Subunit, which releases the initial methionine from its tRNA and attaches it instead by
a peptide bond to the second amino acid (Fig. 20.28).

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Large
ribosomal
subunit

Initiation
factor

Leader sequence

mANA

Small ribosomal
subunit (containing
ribosomal RNA)

Initiation
factor

Initiation complex

Fig. 20.27 Formation of the initiation complex.

The ribosome now moves (translocates) three more nucleotides along the mRNA
molecule in the 5’ —> 3’ direction, guided by other elongation factors. This movement
translocates the initial tRNA to the E site and ejects it from the ribosome, repositions the
growing polypeptide chain (at this point containing two amino acids) to the P site, and
exposes the next codon on the mRNA at the A site (Fig 20.28). When a tRNA molecule
recognizing that codon appears, it binds to the codon at the A site, placing its amino
acid adjacent to the growing chain. The chain then transfers to the new amino acid,
and the entire process is repeated.

r

Elongation
factor

Fig. 20.28 The translocation process.

@)

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Elongation continues in this fashion until a chain-terminating non sense codon is
exposed (for example UAA in Fig 20.29). Nonsense codons do not bind to tRNA, but they
are recognized by release factors, proteins that release the newly made polypeptide
from the ribosomes.

Fig. 20.29 Termination of protein synthesis

MUTATIONS

The cells of eukaryotes contain an enormous amount of DNA. If the DNA in all of the
cells of an adult human were lined up end to end, it would stretch nearly 100 billion
kilometers - 60 times the distance from Earth to Jupiter.

Changes in the DNA occur either due to mistake in replication or damage to the genetic
message causing mutations. The mutations in somatic cells do not pass on to offspring
and so have little evolutionary consequence than germ line changes. The mutation in
germ line cell is passed to subsequent generations thus providing the raw material
from which natural selection produces evolutionary change.

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Mutations can broadly be classified as (i) chromosomal aberration and (ii) point
mutation. Chromosomal aberrations are mega changes which involve presence of an
extra chromosome or loss of achromosome from the diploid number of chromosomes,
or changes like deletions, insertions, inversions etc in the parts of the chromosome,
Such chromosomal aberrations lead to syndromes like Down's syndrome, Klinefelter’s
syndrome etc.

Point mutations are mutational changes which affect the message itself, producing
alterations in the sequence of DNA nucleotide (Table 20.2). If alterations involve only
one or a few base pairs in the coding sequence they are called point mutations. While
some point mutations occur due to spontaneous pairing errors that occur during
DNA replication, others result from damage to the DNA caused by mutagens, usually
radiations or chemicals. The latter class of mutations is of particular practicalimportance
because modem industrial societies often release many chemical mutagens into the
environment. Sickle cell anemia and phenylketonuria are well known examples of point
mutation, both of which have been discussed in previous page. In sickle ceil anemia a
point mutation leads to the change of amino acid glutamic acid into valine at position
6 from N terminal end in hemoglobin P chain. This consequently alters the tertiary
structure of the hemoglobin molecule, reducing its ability to carry oxygen.

In phenylketonuria, phenylalanine is not degraded because of defective enzyme
phenylalanine hydroxylase. Phenylalanine consequently accumulates in the cells
leading to mental retardation, as the brain fails to develop in infancy. This disorder is
because of the point mutation.

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Q.1 Fill in the blanks.

1. Particular tRNA molecules become attached to =peatiic amino acids through the
action of activating enzymes called

2. ___is the transfer of genetic material from one cell to another and can alter
the genetic make up of the recipient cell.
3. In a bacteria, a subunit of RNA polymerase called recognizes-10

sequence in the promoter and binds RNA polymerase there.

4, A typical human chromosome contain about nucleotides in its DNA.

5. Miescher extracted a white substance from the nuclei of human cells and fish
Sperm and called this substance

Q.2 Write whether the statement is true or false and write the correct statement
if it is false.

1. The strand of DNA that is not transcribed is called the coding strand.

2. TA TAAT sequence called - 35 sequence is part of promoter, where transcription
actually starts.

3. Rosalind Franklin carried out an x-ray diffraction analysis of DNA.

4, The base pairs in DNA helix are planar and stack 34 nm apart as a result of
hydrophobic interactions.

Q.4 Short Questions

1. What are the three major classes of RNA?

2. What is the function of RNA polymerase in transcription?

3. How did Crick and his colleagues determine how many nucleotides are used to
specify each amino acid?

4, What is anticodon?

20.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab

Q.5 Extensive Questions
1.How did Hershey and Chase determine which components of bacterial

viruses contain the hereditary information?

2. ‘What is the three dimensional shape of DNA? How does three dimensional shape of
DNA fit with Chargaff s observations on the proportions of purines and pyrimidines
in DNA?

3. How did Meselson and Stahl show that DNA replication is semi conservative?

4, What is the basis for the requirement that the leading and lagging strands be
replicated by different mechanisms?

5. What hypothesis did Beadle and Tatum test in their experiments on Neurospora ?

CHAPTER

ya = Call Cycle

Animation 21 : Cell cycle
ource & Credit: Wikispaces

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
INTRODUCTION

The cell undergoes a sequence of changes, which involves period of growth, replication
of DNA, followed by cell division. This sequence of changes is called cell cycle.

It comprises two phases viz., interphase which is the period of non-apparent
division and the period of division also known as mitotic phase. Each phase is further
subdivided into different sub-phases.

INTERPHASE
The period of life cycle of cell (cell cycle) between two consecutive divisions is

termed as the interphase or misleadingly called resting phase. It is the period of great
biochemical activity and can further be divided into G,-phase, S-phase and G,-phase.
G, (Gap 1) is the period of extensive metabolic activity, in which cell normally grows
in size, specific enzymes, are synthesized and DNA base units are accumulated for the
DNA synthesis. Post-mitotic cell can exit the cell cycle during G, entering a phase called
G,, and remain for days, weeks, or in some cases (e.g., nerve cells and cells of the eye
lens) even the life time of the organism without proliferating further. Following the G, is
the S-phase (synthesis phase) during which the DNA is synthesized and (chromosome
are replicated) which initiates G, phase (pre-mitotic phase), thus preparing the cell for
division e.g., energy storage for chromosome movements, mitosis specific proteins,
RNA and microtubule subunits (for spindle fibers) synthesize. Cells then proceed to
next phase which is the period of division). At each stage, there are specific check
points, which determine the fate of new phase according to cell's internal make up.
Length of each phase is variable. In the case of human cell, average cell cycle is about
24 hours, mitosis takes 30 minutes, G, 9 hours, the S-phase 10 hours, and G, 4.5 hours
whereas full cycle in yeast cells is only 90 minutes.

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

: ) om

Chromosome
decondensation,
re-formation of
Chromosome _ nuclear envelope,
condensation, cytokinesis
nuclear envelope
breakdown,

chromosome

segregation

sister
chromatids

S
DNA synthesis

Fig. 21.1 The fate of a single parental chromosome throughout the eukaryotic cell cycle.

@)

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
MITOSIS

It is the type of cell division, which ensures the same number of chromosomes in the
daughter cells as that in the parent cells. In spite of slight differences, major steps of
mitosis are similar in plants as well as in animals. However, to avoid the confusion
our statement will base on the animal cell. It can take place in haploid as well as in
diploid cells in nearly all parts of the body if and when required.

Mitosis is a continuous process, but conventionally it may be divided into two
phases, i.e., karyokinesis, which involves the division of nucleus and cytokinesis that
refers to the division of the whole cell (Fig.21.2).

(a)Interphase (G2) (b) Early prophase (c) Late prophase (d) metaphase
Centrosomes Spindle poles Kinetochore

ister 3) &
chromatids

(e) Anaphase (f) Telophase (g) Interphase (C2)

Cleavege
furrow

Fig 21.2 The stages of mitosis and cytokinesis in an animal cell.

©

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

Karyokinesis

Atthe beginning ofthe processinan animal cell, the partition of the centriole takes place,
which have been duplicated during interphase but present in the same centrosome.
Early in the mitosis the two pair of centrioles separate and migrate to opposite sides
of the nucleus, establishing the bipolarity of the dividing cells.

Three sets of microtubules (fibers) originate from each pair of centrioles. One set the
astral microtubules, radiate outward and form aster, other two sets of microtubules
compose the spindle. The kinetochore microtubules attach to chromosomes at
kinetochores and polar microtubules do not interact the chromosomes but instead
interdigitate with polar microtubules from the opposite pole. These microtubules are
composed of a protein tubulin and traces of RNA.

This specialized microtubule structure including aster and spindle is called mitotic
apparatus. This is larger than the nucleus, and is designed to attach and capture
chromosomes, aligning them and finally separating them so that equal distribution of
chromosomes is ensured.

Karyokinesis can further be divided into prophase, metaphase, anaphase andtelophase
for thorough understanding, though it is a continuous process.

Prophase

During interphase (non-dividing phase) of the cell cycle the chromosomes are not
visible even with electron microscope, but using histologic stains for DNA, a network

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

of very fine threads can be visualized. This network is called as chromatin.
The chromatin material gets condensed by folding and the chromosomes appear as
thin threads (0.25um - 50um in length) at the beginning of prophase.
Chromosomes become more and more thick ultimately each chromosome is visible
having two sister chromatids, attached at centromere. Towards the end of prophase,
nuclear envelope disappears and nuclear material is released in the cytoplasm, nucleoli
disappear. Mitotic apparatus is organized (as described above). Cytoplasm becomes
more viscous.
Metaphase
Each metaphase chromosome is a duplicated structure which consists of two
sister chromatids, attached at a point called centromere or primary constriction. The
centromere has special area, the kinetochore, with specific base arrangement and
special proteins where kinetochore fibers of mitotic apparatus attach.
The kinetochore fibers of spindle attach to the kinetochore region (specialized area
in centromere) of chromosome, and align them at the equator of the spindle forming
equatorial plate or metaphase plate. Each kinetochore gets two fibers one from each
pole.
Anaphase
It is the most critical phase of the mitosis, which ensures equal distribution of
chromatids in the daughter cells. The kinetochore fibers of spindle contract towards
their respective poles, at the same time polar microtubules elongates exert force and
sister chromatids are separated from centromere. As a result, half sister chromatids
travel towards each pole.
Telophase
Reaching of the chromosomes at opposite poles terminates anaphase and start
telophase. The chromosomes decondense due to unfolding, ultimately disappear as
chromatin. Mitotic apparatus disorganizes nuclear membrane and nucleoli reorganize,
resulting two nuclei at two poles of the cell.
Cytokinesis
During late telophase the astral microtubules send signals to the equatorial region
of the cell, where actin and myosin are activated which form contractile ring, followed
by cleavage furrow, which deepens towards the center of the cell, dividing the parent
cell into two daughter cells.

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

Mitotic events in plant cells are generally similar to the events observed in animal
cells but there are some major differences. Most higher plants lack visible centrioles,
instead they have its analogous region from which the spindle microtubules radiate.
Moreover, shape of the plant cell does not change greatly compared with an animal
cell- because it is surrounded by a rigid cell wall. At cytokinesis, in place of contractile
ring a membrane structure, phragmoplast is formed from vesicle which originate from
Golgi complex. These vesicles originate actually during metaphase, line up in the center
of the dividing cell, where they fuse to form phragmoplast at the end of telophase.
The membrane of vesicles becomes the plasma membrane of daughter cells. These
vesicles also contain materials for future cell wall such as precursors of cellulose and
pectin (Fig.21.3).

Fig 21.3 Mitosis in a higher plant cell

@

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
Importance of mitosis

In mitosis the hereditary material is equally distributed in the daughter cell. As
there is no crossing over or recombination, the genetic information remains unchanged
generation after generation, thus continuity of similar information is ensured from
parent to daughter cell. Some organisms, both plants and animals, undergo asexual
reproduction. Regeneration, healing of wounds and replacement of older cells all are
the gifts of mitosis. Development and growth of multicellular organisms depends upon
orderly, controlled mitosis. Tissue culture and cloning seek help through mitosis. For
all this an organism requires managed, controlled and properly organized process of
mitosis, which otherwise may result malfunction, unwanted tumors and lethal diseases
like cancer.

Cancer (uncontrolled cell division)

The multiplication of cells is so carefully regulated and responsive to specific
needs of the body, that process of cell death and birth are balanced to produce a steady
state. Sometime the control, that regulates the cell multiplication, breaks down. A cell
in which this occurs, begins to grow and divide in unregulated fashion without body's
need for further cells of its type. When such cells produce new cells which continue to
proliferate in incontrolled fashion, an unwanted clone of cells, called tumor is formed,
which can expand indefinitely. Tumors arise frequently, especially in older animals and
humans, and are of two basic types. Some tumors are of small size and localized (not
transferred to other parts) called benign. The cells in this type usually behave like the
normal cells and have little deleterious effects,, only due to either its interference with
normal cells or its hormone-like secretions.

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

Fig: 21.4 result of meiosis,four haploid cells, each
with half as many chromosomes as the original cells.


21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

In contrast, the cells composing a malignant tumor or cancer, divide more rapidly,
mostly invade surrounding tissues, get into the body's circulatory system, and set up
areas of proliferation, away from their site of original appearance. This spread of: tumor
cells and establishment of secondary areas of growth is called as metastasis.

Cancer cells can be distinguished from normal cells because they are less differentiated
than normal cells, exhibit the characteristics of rapidly growing cells, i.e is, high nucleus
to cytoplasm ratio, prominent nucleoli and many mitosis.

The presence of invading cells in otherwise normal tissue is an indication of malignancy.
Cancer is caused mainly by mutations in somatic cells. Secondly, the cancer results
from the accumulation of as few as three to as many as twenty mutations, in genes that
regulate cell divisidn. These mutations bring two basic changes in the cancer cells. First,
the metastatic cells break their contact with other cells and overcome the restrictions
on cell movement provided by basal lamina and other barriers, ultimately metastatic
cells can invade other parts of the body. Secondly, they proliferate, unlimitedly, without
considering the checks or programmes of the body.

MEIOSIS

Meiosis is the special type of cell division in which the number of chromosomes in
daughter cells is reduced to half, as compared to the parent cell. In animals at the time
of gamete formation, while in plants when spores are produced. Each diploid cell after
meiosis produces four haploid cells, because it involves two consecutive divisions after
single replication of DNA. Two divisions, are meiosis | and meiosis Il. The first meiotic
division is the reduction division, whereas second meiotic division is just like the mitosis.
Both divisions can further be divided into substages like prophase 1, metaphase 1,
anaphase 1, telophase 1 and same names are used for meiosis I also (Fig.21.4).
Prophase |
This is very prolonged phase, and differs from the prophase of mitosis, because in this
chromosomes behave as homologous pairs. Each diploid cell has two chromosomes
of each type, one member from each parent, because of fusion of male and female
gametes. Each chromosome has two chromatids, because chromosomes have been
replicated during interphase. The interphase of meiosis lacks G2 stage. These similar
but not necessarily identical chromosomes are called as homologous chromosomes.
Prophase 1 further consists of the io) Stages.

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

Leptotene:
The chromosomes become visible, shorten and thick. The size of the nucleus
increases and homologous chromosomes start getting closer to each other.

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
First essential phenomenon of meiosis i.e., pairing of homologous
chromosomes called synapsis starts. This pairing is highly specific and exactly pointed,
but with no definite starting point(s). Each paired but not fused, complex structure is
called bivalent or tetrad.

The pairing of homologous chromosomes is completed. Chromosomes
become more and more thick. Each bivalent has four chromatids, which wrap around
each other. Non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes exchange their
segments due to chiasmata formation, during the process called crossing over. In this
way reshuffling of genetic material occurs which produces recombinations. Pachytene
may lasts for days, weeks or even years, whereas leptotene and zygotene can last only
for few hours.

The paired chromosomes repel each other and begin to separate. Separation
however, is not complete, because homologous chromosomes remain united by their
point of interchange (chiasmata). Each bivalent has at least one such point, the
chromatids otherwise are separated (Fig. 21.5).

Chiasma Nuclear envelope
visible fragmenting

Nuclear envelope

Nucleous
dispersing

Brvalent ready
for metaphase

Fig. 21.5 Chiasmata formation

@)

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

Diakinesis: During this phase the condensation of chromosomes reaches to its
maximum. At the same time separation of the homologous chromosomes (started
during diplotene) is completed, but still they are united at one point, more often at
ends. Nucleoli disappear.
Metaphase I

Nuclear membrane disorganizes at the beginning of this phase. Spindle fibers originate
and the kinetochore fibers attach to the kinetochore of homologous chromosome from
each pole and arrange bivalents at the equator. The sister chromatids of individual
chromosome in bivalent behave as a unit.
Anaphase I

The kinetochore fibers contract and the spindle or pole fibers elongate, which

pull the individual chromosome (each having two chromatids) towards their respective
poles. It may be noted here that in contrast to anaphase of mitosis, sister chromatids
are not separated. This is actually reduction phase because each pole receives half of
the total number of chromosomes.

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

Telophase I

Nuclear membrane reorganizes around each set of chromosomes at two poles, nucleoli
reappear thus two nuclei each with half number of chromosomes are formed, later on
cytoplasm divides thus terminating the first meiotic division. It is also to be noted that
chromosomes may decondense during this stage.

Meiosis II

After telophase | two daughter cells experience small interphase, but in contrast to
interphase of mitosis there is no replication of chromosomes.

Prophase II, metaphase II, anaphase II and telophase II are just like the respective
phases of mitosis during which the chromosomes, condense, mitotic apparatus forms,
chromosomes arrange at the equator, individual/sister chromatids move apart, and
ultimately four nuclei at the respective poles of two daughter cells (formed after meiosis
|) are formed. Cytokinesis takes place and four haploid cells, with half of the number of
chromosomes (chromatids) are formed.

Importance of Meiosis

Crossing over and random assortment of chromosomes are two significant happenings
of meiosis. During crossing over, parental chromosomes exchange segments with
each other which results in a large number of recombinations. At the same time
during anaphase the separation of homologous chromosomes is random, which gives
very wide range of variety of gametes. Both these phenomena cause variations and
modifications in the genome. These variations are not only the bases of evolution, but
also make every individual specific, particular and unique in his characteristics. Even
the progeny of very same parents, i.e., brothers and sisters are not identical to each
other.

Meiosis usually takes place at the time of sexual cell (gamete) formation, spore formation
in plants, thus having the number of chromosomes in each, which is restored after
fertilization and maintains chromosome number constant generation after generation.
Had meiosis not been the process, the chromosome number may have been doubled
after every generation. Can you imagine the consequences?

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

MEIOTIC ERRORS (NON-DISJUNCTION)

Meiosis is an orderly occurring phenomenon, which ensures every phase with
appropriate finish, but some times, at any point the result may be unexpected, causing
abnormalities.One of such abnormalities is chromosome non-disjunction, in which
chromosomes fail to segregate during anaphase and telophase and do not finish with
equal distribution of chromosome among all the daughter nuclei. This results either
increase or decrease in the number of chromosomes, causing serious physical, social
and mental disorders. This non-disjunction may be in autosome or in sex chromosome.
Some examples of each type may be discussed below in some detail.

Down’s Syndrome (Mongolism)

It is one of the consequences of autosomal non-disjunction in man, during which
21st pair of chromosome fails to segregate, resulting in gamete with 24 chromosome.
When this gamete, fertilizes normal gamete the new individual will have 47 (2n + 1)
chromosomes. Non-disjunction appears to occur in the ova and is related to the age of
mother. The chances of teenage mother having Down’s syndrome child is one in many
thousands, forty years old mother, one in hundred chances and by forty-five the risk-is
three times greater. The affected individuals have flat, broad face, squint eyes with the
Skin fold in the inner corner, and protruding tongue, mental retardation, and defective
development of central nervous system.

Autosomal non-disjunction may occur in other than 21st chromosome which usually
results in abortion, or death in very early age.
Klinefelter’s Syndrome

These individuals have additional sex chromosome e.g., 47 chromosomes (44
.autosome + XXY). They are phenotypically male but have frequently enlarged breasts,
‘tendency to tallness, obesity, small testes with no sperms at ejaculation and under
developed secondary sex characters.
Males with 48 chromosomes (44 autosomes + XXXY), with 49 chromosomes (44
autosomes + XXXXY) and with 47 chromosomes (44 autosomes + XYY) are also observed
(Fig. 21.6).
Turner’s Syndrome
These affected individuals have one missing X chromosome with only 45 chromosomes
(44 autosomes + X). Individuals with this condition often do not survive pregnancy and
are aborted. Those who survive have female appearance with short stature, webbed
neck, without ovaries and complete Cts) of germ cells.

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

Meiosis | nondisjunction Meiosis Il nondisjunction

Meiosis |
Lid
Gamnetes / / ; Meiosis 's
(onetime n+1
ee of nondisju nction Arona

Fig. 21.6 Non-disjunction of autosomes (a) Non disjunction occurring during meiosis | and
meiosis Il, gametes (asterisks mark points of non-disjunction), (b) Frequency of syndromes

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

Necrosis and Apoptosis

Cells in an organism depend upon various extracellular and intracellular signals for
its regulated, controlled activities like cell division, pattern formation, differentiation,
morphogenesis and motility. Each cell is predestined to its fate i.e., what responsibility
it has to take and in which way. Even the death of the cell is programmed.

Programmed cell death helps in proper control of multicellular development, which

may lead to deletion of entire structure (e.g., the tail of developing human embryos)
or part of structure (e.g., tissue between developing digits). Cell death even controls
the number of neurons, because most of the neurons in the human body die during
development.

Cell death in multicellular organisms is controlled by two fundamentally different
ways, i.e., either the cell commits suicide in the absence of survival signals (trophic
factors) or cells are murdered by killing signals from other cells.

Internal programme of events and sequence of morphological changes by
which cell commits suicide is collectively called as apoptosis (Greek word that means
dropping off or falling off).

21. Cell Cycle

During this process the dying cells
shrink and condense ultimately split
up, thus releasing small membrane
bounded apoptotic bodies, which are
generally phagocytosed by other cells
(Fig.21.7). Intracellular constituents
are not released freely in extracellular
atmosphere which otherwise might
have deleterious effects. In contrast
to suicide, the cell death due to tissue
damage is called necrosis, during which
the Fig21.7 typical cell swells and bursts,
releasing the intracellular contents,
which can damage neighbouring cells
and cause inflammation.

eLearn.Punjab

Mild convolution

Chromatin
compaction and
segregation

condensation of
cytoplasm

Nuclear
fragmentation
Blebbing

Cell fragmentation

Phagocytosis
___. Apoptotic Cell

k

]
“= Phagocytic cell
‘i fh

e
Lee 7 a

Fig: 21.7 Ultrastructural features of cell death by apoptosis

21. Cell Cycle

eLearn.Punjab

Q.1 Fill in the blanks.

. Mongolism is also Known as

. During homologous chromosomes get close to each other.

phase precedes G2 phase.

. Polar microtubules during anaphase.

. Mitotic apparatus is formed during off cell division.

. The chromosome number (44+1) denotes Syndrome.

7. Intracellular contents are released during the type of cell death called --------- ,

NU KRWN

Q.3 Write true / false against each statement, fif It is false, rewrite tfhettmie
statement

1. Meiosis occurs in haploid cells only.

2. Cell cycle is comprised of two phases i.e. karyokinesis and cytokinesis.

3. A point where non-sister chromatids cross each other is called kinetochore.
4. G, stands for no gap,

5. Full life cycle of yeast cells require 90 seconds to be completed.

6. Crossing over takes place during metaphase I.

21. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab

7. Autosomal non disjunction may occurinchromosomes other than21st chromosome,
8. Benign tumors are always non localized,

9. Cancer is caused mainly by mutations in germ cells.

10. Genetic informations remain unchanged during mitosis.

11. Homologous chromosomes are necessarily identical.

12. The cells are kept alive due to trophic factors.

13. Cytokinesis involves the division of cytochromes.

14. Phragmoplast is a type of fragmentation.

Q.4. Short questions

. Differentiate between necrosis and apoptosis.

. What are the functions of mitotic apparatus?

. How can you identify the cancer cells?

. Give importance and significance of meiosis.

. Define chromosomal non disjunction.

. What are symptoms of turner’s syndrome?

. Define cell cycle. Highlight its importance and significance.

. ls interphase a resting phase? Why?

. In what respect does mitosis in plant cells differ from that in animal cells?

WO CON A UN KRWN =

Q3. Extensive questions.

1. How does cytokinesis occur in animals cells? In which way does it differ from that in
plant cell?

2. Why and how do the chromosomes get separated during anaphase of mitosis?

. What is the role of centriole in an animal cell? How is this function carried out in
plant cell?

. ln what respect can cell death be regarded beneficial?

. Compare mitosis with meiosis and describe their importance.

. Define disjunction and discuss its effect.

. Describe meiosis and explain its significance.

WJ

NO UW f

CHAPTER

22

VARIATION AND
GENETICS

Animation 22:: Variation and Genetics

ource & Credit: Wikispaces

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

GENES, ALLELES AND GENE POOL

Hereditary characteristics pass from parents to offspring through genes in their
gametes. Gene is the basic unit of biological information. In fact DNA stores all sorts of
biological information coded in the sequence of its bases in a linear order, and genes
are actually parts of DNA comprising its base sequences. The position of a gene on the
chromosome is called its locus.

Genes are responsible for producing startling inherited resemblences as well as
distinctive variations among generations. When these pass in the form of intact
parental combination between generations, inherited similarities are conserved; but
when these shuffle, mutate or juggle with each other, variations emerge. Genes form
pairs on pairs of homologous chromosomes. One member of a gene pair is located on
one homologue, and the other member on the other homologue. Partners of a gene
pair are called alleles. Each allele of a gene pair occupies the same gene locus on its
respective homologue. Both alleles on one locus may be identical, or different from
each other. (Fig. 22.1).

Animation 22: Gene Pool

IF SOUP

@)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Homologous
Chromosomes

Alleles of the
same gene

Different
genes

Homozygous
dominant
alleles

Heterozygous
alleles

Homozygous
recessive
alleles

Fig 22.1 Allelic pairs on a homologous pair of chromosomes

@)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Phenotype is the form of appearance of a trait. Genotype is the genetic complement
i.e., the genes in an individual for a particular trait. A flower may be red or white in
colour. Flower colour is a trait and red and white are its two phenotypes. Each form
of expression is determined-by a different allele of the colour gene. Allele “R” is the
determiner for redness, while “r” is the determiner for whiteness.

GENE POOL

Any group of interbreeding organisms of the same species that exist together in
both time and space is called a population. All the genes/alleles found in a breeding
population at a given time are collectively called the gene pool. It is the total genetic
information encoded in the total genes in a breeding population existing at a given
time.

If we imagine population not as a group of individuals, but as a group of individually
segregating and randomly assorting alleles, we can understand the concept of “beanbag
genetics”. The alleles are like beans in a beanbag. The entire beanbag full of beans is
the gene pool of the population. In the beanbag approach we can imagine the entire
gene pool comprising all the alleles for all the different traits at once, or we can just
focus on some subset, such as all the alleles for a single trait.

For convenience, we can focus on the gene pool for a single particular trait. A sample
population of 100 diploid plants, some of which bear red flowers, others bearing white
flowers has a sum total of 200 of all the different alleles (R or r) for flower colour trait
as its gene pool.

©

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

MENDELS LAWS OF INHERITANCE

Gregor Johann Mendel (1822 - 1884) laid the foundation of classical genetics by
formulating two laws of heredity; law of segregation and law of independent assortment.
He was a priest. He performed series of breeding experiments on garden pea, Pisum
sativum in his monastery garden for eleven years (1854 — 1865). Pisum sativum was
easy to cultivate and it grew well in his garden. Its flowers were hermaphrodite. It was
normally self-fertilizing, but could also be cross-fertilized. As the time gap between
generations was short, Mendel could raise many generations of pea within a short time.
Pea had many sharply distinct traits. Each trait had two clear cut alternative forms or
varieties; e.g., seed shape had a round or wrinkled phenotype, plant height was either
tall or short, seed colour could be yellow or green. Mendel called them contrasting pair
of a trait. He focussed on seven such pairs (Fig. 22.2).

He first established true-breeding lines or varieties for each trait. A true - breeding
variety upon self - fertilization always produced offspring identical to the parents,
e.g., a true breeding “round” seed plant produced only “round” seeds. Similarly, a true
breeding “wrinkled” seed plant produced only “wrinkled” seeds.

After establishing 14 pure - breeding lines of seven characters, he cross-fertilized
plants that differed in one character only. The offspring of such a cross were called
monohybrids. He cross-fertilized a true breeding round-seeded male plant with a true
breeding wrinkled-seeded female plant (Fig. 22.3).

Animation 22.2:Mendel’s Law of Inheritance

s. Anderson Biology Clas


22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

: Dominant
Trait VS. .
recessive
Flower
color

Seed
color

Seed
shape

Pod
color

Pod
shape

Flower
position

(6-7 feet) Tall anche Site;

Fig 22.2 Seven traits of garden pea studied by Mendel.

©)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

He called it first parental generation (Pi). Their offspring were called Fi or first filial
generation. All Fi offspring were round like one of the parents. Wrinkled phenotype did
not appear at all. Round dominated wrinkled. Its dominance was complete because no
offspring intermediate between parents was found. He called the trait that appeared
in F, as dominant; while the trait,
which was masked, as recessive.

PR

X

Then Mendel allowed _ self-

fertilizationamongF| monohybrids VAN
to raise F2 progeny. As a result of

monohybrid cross 3A of F2 were Fi g Rr X Rr
round and IA wrinkled. (i

Mendel got similar results and

the same 3:1 ratio in offspring of F2 OHOn

monohybrid crosses for all the
seven contrasting pairs of traits.
Mendel proceeded a step ahead.

He self- fertilized F2 plants to raise
F3. He noted that 1/3 of F2 round
produced only round, while 2/3

of F2 round produced both round Phenotypic ratio 3 :1
and wrinkled in . 3:1 ratio; but F1 Genotypic ratio
wrinkled produced only wrinkled. “ e ° . .
He concluded that 1/3 of F2 *° “ee . —
rounds were true-breeding like Pi Vd e 6
round, and 2/3 of F2 rounds were TRR : 2Rr : Trr
monohybrids like Fj round. 3 1
Round Wrinkled

Fig 22.3 Mendel'scross to study single trait inheritance in pea.

@

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Mendel’s Interpretations

Mendel proposed that each contrasting form of a trait, e.g., roundness or wrinkledness
of seed was determined by particulate hereditary factors, which he called ‘elementen’.
These factors carrying hereditary information were transmitted from parents to
offspring through gametes. Each pea plant had a pair of these factors, one derived
from male parent and the other from female parent. Both of these factors together
controlled expression of a trait. He designated dominant factor with a capital letter and
recessive factor with a small letter; e.g., R for roundness factor and r for wrinkledness
factor. Johannsen renamed them as ‘genes’.

The true - breeding round seed plant of P| generation carried ‘RR’ alleles while the
true - breeding wrinkled seed plant of Pi carried ‘it’ alleles. When both the alleles of a
gene pair in an organism are same, the organism is homozygous for that gene pair. An
individual with a homozygous genotype is a homozygote.

Fig 22.4 Segregation of alleles during gamete formation

Mendel inferred that the factors of a pair (alleles) separated from each other during
gamete formation so that each gamete got only one factor (allele) for each trait. So half
the gametes got one allele, and the other half carried the other allele. Fertilization
was random. When male gamete carrying factor (R) fertilized female gamete with factor
(r), the complete set of the two factors (Rr) for the trait was restored in zygote.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

The zygote developed into Fj offspring that was heterozygous ‘Rr’, because the two
alleles of its gene pair were different from each other. An individual with a heterozygous
genotype is a heterozygote. Fi offspring (Rr) was a monohybrid for seed shape; it was
round in phenotype but heterozygous in genotype. Its alleles also segregated during
gamete formation (Fig. 22.4).

Punnett square indicates that IA of F2 progeny would have been ‘RR’ (homozygous
round), IA + IA = Yi Rr (heterozygous round), and IA rr (wrinkled).

Mendel actually observed 3 ; 1 phenotypic ratio in F2. His phenotypic data of F3 can
also be explained on the basis of 1 : 2: 1 genotypic ratio of F2. Mendel compared
the results of all the seven separately studied characters, and found them strikingly
similar to formulate law of segregation.

Law of Segregation : According to law of segregation, the two coexisting alleles for
each trait in an individual segregate (Separate) from each other at meiosis, so that each
gamete receives only one of the two alleles. Alleles unite again at random fertilization
of gametes when zygote is formed.

Test Cross

Mendel devised a cross called test cross, which is used to test the genotype of an
individual showing a dominant phenotype. It is a mating in which an individual showing
a dominant phenotype is crossed with an individual showing its recessive phenotype.
This cross finds out the homozygous or heterozygous nature of the genotype (Fig.
22.5).

Animation 22: Test Cross

Source & Credit:

@)

22. Variation And Genetics

If the seed is homozygous round(RR) it
will grow into a pea plant that forms all
gametes with only “R© allele.Wrinkled
seed plant is

always homozygous
recessive.it will form all gametes with
“r’ allele.Fertilization will result in 100%
round seed progeny.

Round xX Wrinkled
RR rr
7% / \
R R Fr r
r

R Rr

FFTs oii

All round seed progeny .

The tested phenotypically dominant
individual is homozygous.

eLearn.Punjab

If the seed is heterozygous round (Rr), it
will grow into a plant that forms half the
gametes, with ‘Rand half with ‘r’ allele.
Wrinkled seed plant will form only ‘r°
type of gametes. Fertilization will result
into 50% round and 50% wrinkled seed
progeny. Even a single wrinkled seed in
the progeny is a convincing proof for
Heterozygous nature of the round
parent.

Wrinkled

r /\,

Round x

Rr
es
R 16

1
Z

1 r
>R  4Rr
dr oder

1/2 round seed and
1/2 wrinkled seed progeny.

The tested phenotypically dominant
indiidual is heterozygous .

Fig 22.5 Test cross of a round seed

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Dihybrid and Dihybrid Cross

After thoroughly studying each trait separately , Mendel decided to study the inheritance
of two simultaneously , e.g., seed shape and seed colour. Seed shape could be round
or wrinkled. Similarly , seed colour could be yellow or green. He crossed true breeding
round and yellow seed plants with true breeding wrinkled and green seed plants . All F,
dihybrid were round and yellow seeded due to dominance. Then he made a dihybrid
cross by allowing self-fertilization among F1 dihybrids. The results was quite surprising.
Seeds produced as F2 progeny were ot only in the two parental combination i.e.,
round yellow and wrinkled green, but also in two new phenotypic combination

i.e., round green and wrinkled yellow. A clear cut 9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio was found
in F2. Appearance of these new recombinant phenotypes of F2 indicated that some
sort of shuffling of alleles had occurred during gemete formation. Mendel inferred
the mechanism of this shuffling as independent assortment of alleles into gametes.
He concluded that the alleles for seed shape and colour were not bound to remain in
parental combination forever, i.e., ‘R’ with ‘Y’ and ‘r’ with ‘y’ ;rather these were free to
assort independently . R could go with Y or y in any gamete with equal change.

Animation 22: Dihyrid Cross
IF SOUP

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Similarly, r could go with y or Y in any gamete with equal probability. Four types of
gametes, i.e., RY, Ry, ry and ry were formed in equal number in a perfect ratio of 1:1
: 1:1. When these gametes randomly fertilized each other, a 9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio
was produced among F2 progeny (Fig 22.6).

Mendel formulated Law of Independent Assortment : “When two contrasting pairs of
traits are followed in the same cross, their alleles assort independently into gametes.”
Alleles of one pair inherit independently of alleles of the other pair. The distribution of
alleles of one trait into gametes has no influence on the distribution of alleles of the
other trait. Thus the chance for a plant to be round or wrinkled is independent of its
chance of being yellow or green.

Probability is the chance of an event to occur. Inheritance of seed shape is an
independent event. In F2 offspring of a monohybrid cross the independent chance
for a seed to be round is 3/4, or it to be wrinkled is 1/4. Inheritance of seed colour is
another separate event. The independent chance in F2 of amonohybrid cross for a seed
to he vellow is 3/4 or it to be green is 1/4. When two independent events are occunng
simultaneously like m Dihybrid cross, the ratio of each joint phenotypic combination
can be obtained by multiplying the probabilities of individual phenotypes. It is called

product rule.
The joint probability that both of the independent events will occur simultaneously, is
equal to the product of individual probabilities of each event.

Animation 22: Product Rule

Source & Credit:

@)

22. Variation And Genetics

Round Wrinkled
yellow green

P1 generation

Fi generation

Fix Fi } X )
Rr¥y r¢ RrYy

F2 generation

eLearn.Punjab

Fig 22.6 Dihybrid cross produces parental as well as recominant types.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Event No. 1 Event No. 2 Both events at a time

Seed shape Seed colour Seed shape and colour

Independent probability to}Independent probability to |Joint probability to be:

Round = Round yellow =9/16

Round = Round green = x = 3/16
Wrinkled = Wrinkled yellow = x = 3/16
Wrinkled = Wrinkled green =

Genes are located at specific loci on chromosomes. Independent assortment of genes
depends upon independent assortment of their chromosomes. All the genes present
ona homologous pair of chromosomes are linked to each other in the form of a linkage
group. These cannot assort independently. Those traits assort independently whose
alleles are riding non homologous chromosomes. Pea has seven homologous pairs
of chromosomes. Mendel knew nothing about chromosomes. The traits he studied
were confined to only four chromosomes. He reported independent assortment of
those traits whose genes were either on different homologous chromosomes, or were
So far away from each other on the same chromosome that they appeared to assort
independently due to crossing over.

Mendel presented his findings to Brunn Society for the study of Natural Science in
1865. His work was published in the proceedings of the society in 1866. That laid the
foundation of classical genetics. His work lay neglected for 34 years. In 1900, 16 years
after his death, three botanists; Correns, De Varies and Tschermach independently
rediscovered and acknowledged his work.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Activity: Normal individuals have melanin pigment in their skin, hair and eyes. Albinos
totally lack pigment in their bodies. Albinism is a recessive trait in humans. Two normal
parents have an albino child. What is the probability that their next child will also be an
albino?

DOMINANCE RELATIONS

Dominance is a physiological effect of an allele over its partner allele on the same gene
locus. There are four types of dominance relations among alleles, each indicating a
different style of their functional effect upon each other.

1.Complete dominance 2.Incomplete dominance

3.Cociominance 4. Over dominance

Complete Dominance

When one allele (R) is completely dominant over the other (r), presence of the recessive
allele is functionally hidden, so the heterozygote (Rr) has the same round phenotype
as (RR) homozygote.

The contrasting pairs of alleles for all the seven characters chosen by Mendel showed
complete dominance. After Mendel, further breeding experiments were carried out
on different plants and animals. Many novel phenotypes and phenotypic rat tios were
observed that could not be explained on the basis of complete dominance.
Incomplete Dominance

In 1899 Carl Correns was working on a flowering plant named 4 O'clock. When he
crossed a true breeding fed flowered plant with a true breeding white flowered 4 O'clock,
all the F] hybrids had pink flowers. This new phenotype had a shade intermediate
between those of the parents due to an intermediate amount of pigment in petals.
When Correns self-fertilized Fi pink, the F2 showed all three phenotypes of flowers’in
the ratio of 1 red : 2 pink : 1 white. Red was homozygous for red alleles, and white was
homozygous for white alleles. But when allele for red and allele for white were present
together in the same plant, neither of them masked the effect of other; rather these
alleles showed incomplete dominance in the form of pink colour.

@)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Fi X Fi

Fig 22.7 Incomplete dominance in 4 O’ clock

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

When the phenotype of the heterozygote is intermediate between phenotypes of the
two homozygotes, it is called incomplete or partial dominance.

As there is no truly dominant allele, the usual capital and small letter distinction for
dominant and recessive trait is not necessary. Both the alleles are represented by the
same letter ‘R’ but are numbered differently to distinguish white from red. Allele for
red is designated as R|, and the allele for white as R2 (Fig. 22.7).

Punnett square indicates that the phenotypic ratio is the same as the genotypic ratio.
There is absolutely no need of a test cross. Do these results make Mendel's principles
invalid? The flower colour does show blending at phenotypic level in Fi, which is quite
contrary to what Mendel observed. But the re-appearance of red and white flowers in
F2 confirms that blending does not occur at genetic level.

Codominance

The phenotype of heterozygote is distinct in quality from those of the two homozygotes.
Itis not an intermediate quantitative expression like incomplete dominance. Each allele
of the gene pair is associated with a different substance, e.g.,

Produces

Allele A, ——~——— Substance X
Allele A, S25, Substance Y

Codominance occurs when both the alleless express independently in heterozygote;
(A|A2) and form their respective products X and Y. The codominant heterozygote
would have both substances at the same time.

Different alleles of a gene that are both expressed in a heterozygous condition are
called codominant.

@

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

MN BLOOD TYPE OR BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM

Human blood groups can be of many types, e.g. ABO, MN, MNSs, Rh ete. Landsteiner
and Levine discovered MN blood types in man on the basis of specific antigens present
on RBC. These RBC antigens induce production of their specific antibodies. There are
three general phenotypes; M,N and MN. M phenotype has antigen M which is produced
by gene LM. N phenotype has antigen N that is produced by its allele LN. MN phenotype
has both M and N antigens, simultaneously produced by their alleles LM and LN

If a man of M blood group marries a woman of N blood group, all their children will
have MN blood group (Fig. 22.8)

Animation 22: Blood Group System

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

P, M } X N © Phenotype
EL tee Genotype
Gametes

MN
F, ej and Q

Fig 22.8 Codominance in MN Blood group alleles.

Over Dominance

This dominance relation is fascinating because the over dominant heterozygote exceeds
in quantity the phenotypic expression of both the homozygotes. In fruit fly Drosophila
the heterozygote (w+ / w) has more quantity of fluorescent pigments in eyes than wild
(W+ / W+) Or white eye (w/ w) homozygotes.

MULTIPLE ALLELES

Gene mutations may produce many different alleles of a gene. Some genes may have
as many as 300 alleles. All such altered alternative forms of a gene, whose number
is more than two, are called multiple alleles. Any two of these multiple alleles can be
present in the genome of a diploid organism, but a haploid organism or a gamete can

have just one of them in its genome.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

ABO - The First Discovered Multiple Allelic Blood Group System in Man

ABO blood group system was discovered by Karl Landsteiner in 1901. ABO system has
four different phenotypes which are distinct from each other on the basis of specfic
antigens on the surface of RBC. A person having antigen A has blood group A; a person
having antigen B has blood group B; a person having both the antigens A and B has
blood group AB; but a person having neither antigen A nor B would have blood group
O.

Bernstein explained the genetic basis of ABO system in 1925. This blood group system
is encoded by a single polymorphic gene | on chromosome 9. It has three multiple
alleles IA, IB, and i.

Allele IA specifies production of antigen A, and allele IB specifies production of antigen
B, but allele i does not specify any antigen. Their dominance relations are interesting
too. Alleles IA and IB are codominant to each other, because each expresses equally
in IA IB heterozygote to produce AB phenotype. But allele i is recessive to both IA and
IB. Therefore IA IA or IAi genotypes will produce phenotype A. Similarly IB IB or IBi
produces phenotype B. The homozygous ii will produce phenotype O.


22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

The blood group alleles start their expression at early embryonic stage and keep on
expressing themselves till death. Therefore the blood group phenotype of a person
never changes throughout life.

Anti-A and anti-B antibodies appear in plasma during the first few months after birth.
They are naturally occuring in the absence of corresponding antigen. The blood serum
of A phenotype contains anti-B antibodies. They will agglutinate7or clump any RBC
which have B antigens on them. B phenotype contains anti-A antibodies in the serum
and agglutinate any RBC with antigen A. Phenotype AB has neither anti-A nor anti-B
antibodies in the serum. The serum of O blood type contains both anti-A and anti-B
antibodies. The blood serum containing anti-bodies is called antiserum.

Any blood transfusion is ideally safe if it does not cause agglutination in the recipient.
Agglutination leads to serious results because clumped cells cannot pass through fine
capillaries. The blood samples of the donor and the recipient are cross matched for
compatibility before giving transfusion. If incompatible blood is transfused, dangerous
hemolytic reaction occurs. Either the antibodies of the recipient destroy the RBC of
donor or the antibodies of the donor hemolyze the RBC of the recipient.

Blood group A can be transfused only into A and AB recipients because they do
not have anti - A antibodies. Blood group B can be transfused only into B and AB
recipients as they do not have anti - B antibodies. AB blood can be transfused only into
AB recipients because they have neither anti - A, nor anti B antibodies. O blood has
neither A nor B antigen, but it does have anti - A and anti-B antibodies. An O recipient
can only be given tranfusion from a donor O. Phenotype O can also be used as donor
for small transfusions to A, B and AB recipients because donor's antibodies are quickly
absorbed by other tissues or greatly diluted in the recipient's blood stream. O blood
group individuals are called universal donors. AB blood group individuals are called
universal recipients because they can receive transfusions of blood from any of the
four blood groups.


22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Genetic analysis on the basis of blood groups helps in solving cases of disputed
parentage. It can only be used to prove that an individual is not the parent of a particular
child, e.g. a child of AB phenotype (IA IB) can not be the child of a parent of phenotype
O (ii). Similarly a man of B phenotype cannot be father of a blood type A child, whose
mother is of phenotype O. His father could either be A or AB phenotype.

Activity: Two new born babies get mixed up in the nursery of a hospital. Baby | is.
type B and baby Il is of type O. Determine their parentage from the phenotypes of
these two couples. Mr. Haris is type A and Mrs. Haris is type AB. Mr. and Mrs. Bilal are
both of type A.

Rh Blood Group System

ABO blood type is further differentiated by a + or - sign. This positive or negative sign
refers to the presence or absence of another blood group system antigen called Rh
factor. Rh blood group system is defined on the basis of Rh factor present on the
surface of RBC. This system is named Rh after Rhesus monkey, because its antigen was
first discovered in it by Landsteiner in 1930s.

Rh blood group system is encoded by three genes C, D and E, which occupy two tightly
linked loci. Alleles of gene D occupy one locus called locus D, while genes C and E
alternatively occupy the other locus. The D locus is of prime importance.

Gene D has two alleles, D and d. D is completely dominant over d. Persons having
genotype DD or Dd have Rh factor on their RBC and are Rh+. Persons with genotype
dd do not have Rh factor and are Rh-. Unlike the naturally occuring anti - A and anti -
B antibodies of ABO system, anti - Rh antibody production requires a stimulus by the
human Rh antigen itself. An Rh- person does not produce anti - Rh antibodies unless
he is exposed to Rh antigen. Rh+ donor is totally incompatible for Rh- recipient. If an
Rh- person receives Rh antigen through wrong Rh+ blood transfusion, he will begin
to produce anti - Rh antibodies against Rh antigens. Rh- blood, clear of any anti - Rh
antibody from a donor who has never been exposed to Rh antigen can be transfused

to Rh+ recipient. (2)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Erythroblastosis foetalis : Maternal-foetal Rh incompatibility Maternal-foetal
incompatibility results when an Rh- woman, married to an Rh+ man conceives a child
who is Rh+. If the man’s genotype is DD, all of their offspring (Dd) will be Rh+. If the
man’s genotype is Dd, half of their offspring with Dd genotype will be Rh+. If RBC of
Rh+ foetus cross the placental barrier and enter into Rh- mother’s blood stream, the
mother’s immune system reacts to the foetal Rh antigen stimulus by producing a large
number of anti - Rh antibodies. When mother’s anti - Rh antibodies seep through
placenta into blood circulation of foetus, they start hemolysis (break down / bursting)
of RBC of foetus. As this destruction continues, the foetus becomes anaemic. The
anaemic foetus starts to release many -immature erythroblasts into his blood stream.
That is why this hemolytic disease of the new bom is called erythroblastosis foetalis.
This anaemia may lead to .abortion or still birth. Even if the pregnancy continues,
the liver and spleen of the foetus swell as they rapidly produce RBC. The breakdown
product of RBC called bilirubin also accumulates in the foetus. Bilirubin damages his
brain cells and turns his skin and whites of the eye yellow. This condition is jaundice.
So the baby if born alive, suffer from severe hemolytic anaemia and jaundice. Such
baby’s blood should be immediately replaced by Rh” blood free of anti - Rh antibodies.
The first Rh incompatible pregnancy may not face much problems if very few of foetal
antigens cross placenta into maternal circulation and the amount of maternal antibody
production is not very high. But when placenta detaches at birth, a large number of
foetal cells enter mother’s blood stream and stimulate production of large amount of
anti - Rh antibodies by the mother. These anti - Rh antibodies persist in mother’s blood
for a long time and are persistent risk for the next Rh+ foetus. Rh sensitization of Rh’
mother is avoided by a simple therapy. She is given an injection of Rh antiserum during
early pregnancy and immediately after birth. The Rh - antibodies in the Rh antiserum
will destroy Rh+ RBC of the foetus before they stimulate production of maternal anti -
Rh antibodies. The injected antiserum disappears before the next pregnancy


22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Activity: An Rh” woman is married to an Rh+ man whose father was also Rh”. What is
the probable risk of erythroblastosis foetalis in their babies?
EPISTASIS

When an effect caused by a gene or gene pair at one locus interferes with or hides the
effect caused by another gene or gene pair at another locus, such a phenomenon of
gene interaction is called epistasis. Epistasis must not be confused with dominance.
Dominance is the relationship between alleles of the same gene occupying the same
locus, but epistasis is the interaction between different genes occupying different loci.
Bombay Phenotype

The expression of-ABO blood type antigens by IA or IB gene depends upon the presence
of another gene H. ABO locus is on chromosome 9, while H locus is on chromosome
19. H gene changes a precursor substance into substance H. It produces an enzyme
that inserts a sugar onto a precussor glycoprotein on the Surface of RBC. Only then
antigen A or antigen B specified by IA or | gene could attach to this sugar of substance
H. The recessive allele h cannot insert sugar molecule to glycoprotein. Therefore, hh
individuals lack the site of attachment for antigen A pr antigen B. Thus A and B antigens
cannot adhere to their RBC and fall away. Their RBC lack A and B antigens although they
do not lack IA and IB genes. They are phenotypically like O, but are not genotypically O.
Their phenotype is called Bombay phenotype (Fig. 22.9).

Activity: A student, of biology learns about ABO blood types. He knows that he’is type
O, and his father is type A and mother is type AB. He wonders how his blood type could
have arisen. Suggest how type A and AB parents could produce a child of blood type O.

PLEIOTROPY

When a single gene affects two or more traits, the phenomenon is called pleiotropy.
Such a gene with multiple phenotypic effect is called pleiotropic.

Examples:

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

1. White eye gene in Drosophila also affects the shape of sperm storing organs
(spermathecae).

2. Genes that affect growth rate in humans also influence both weight and height.

3. Incats, the dominant allele W not only makes fur pure white but also causes deafness.
In ww homozygous normal pigmented cats, melanocytes produce pigment of fur
and also contribute to ‘hair cells in inner ear that sense sound.

When a cat gets W allele, its melanocytes fail to develop properly. Melanocyte failure

causes both phenotypes, i.e. white fur and deafness.

CONTINUOUSLY VARYING TRAITS

Genotype interacts with environment to produce phenotype. Phenotypic expression
of traits has two aspects:

(i) Qualitative

(ji) Quantitative

Qualitative differences are large and more obvious, but quantitiave variations are small
and less striking. Some traits, like pea seed shape, show discontinuous qualitative
variations with two sharply distinct phenotypes, round or wrinkled; others like 4 O'clock
flower colour can have three phenotypes, red, pink and white; still others like ABO
blood group system have four qualitatively different phenotypes A, B, AB and O. But
many traits like height, weight, intelligence and skin colour in humans, and grain colour
in wheat exibit continuous quantitative variation over a range of many phenotypes.
endel focused on traits that showed only two qualitatively different phenotypes which
could be determined by just two alternate alleles of a single gene. Darwin observed small
continuous variations within individuals of a population. Such a range of phenotypic
spectrum of atrait cannot be traced to a single gene with two alleles. Even afew multiple
alleles of a single gene cannot make such a wide range of phenotypes.

@5)

22. Variation And Genetics

Blood Group

AB

\e)

Bombay ©) —{a)

Fig 22.9 Bombay phenotype results from epistasis

eLearn.Punjab

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

MA continuously varying trait is encoded by alleles of two or more different gene
pairs found at different loci, all influencing the same trait in an additive way. These
quantitative traits, are called polygenic traits, and their genes are polygenes. Each
polygene has asmall positive or negative effect on the character. Polygenes supplement
each other and sum of positive and negative effects of all individual polygenes produce
quantitative phenotypes of a continuously Varying trait.

Wheat grains vary in colour from white to dark red. This trait shows a continuous
spectrum of colour variation. (Fig 22-10). Some grains are white, some are deep red but
most grains have shades in between from light pink to moderately dark red. Nilsson
- Ehle studied the genetics of wheat grain colour. When he crossed a true breeding
dark red grain plant with a true breeding white grain plant, all Fi grains had light red
colour, intermediate between two parental shades. It seemed as if it was a case of
incomplete dominance. But when Fi.grains were grown to mature plants and crossed
with each other, F2 grains had exactly seven shades of colour in the ratio of 1 dark red
:6 moderately dark red: 15 red: 20 light red: 15 pink : 6 light pink : 1 white (Fig. 22-11).

Fig 22.10 Colour variation in wheat grains is a polygenic traits.

@)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Three different gene pairs, i.e. Aa, Bb, Cc at three different loci contribute to the wheat
grain colour. Each individual would contain six alleles for the trait. Alleles A, B and C
code for an equal amount (dose) of red pigment, which is a positive effect. But none
of a, b and c encode red pigment, which is a no (zero) dose negative effect. If all the six
alleles code for red pigment (AABBCC), the grain is dark red; when none of the six alleles
encode red pigment (aabbcc), the grain is white. When a grain has one allele for red
pigment (Aabbcc or aaBbcc or aabbCc) its colour is light pink; if it has two alleles for the
pigment (AaBbcc or aaBbCc or AabbCc) it is pink, if it has three pigment alleles (AaBbCc
or AABbcc or AabbCC), it will be light red. Similarly four alleles colour dose (AABBcc or
aaBBCC or AAbbCC) will make red and five alleles colour dose (AABBCc or AABbCC or
AaBBCC) will produce moderately dark red grain. Thus the colour phenotype of the
grain is the sum of the individual effects of all the six alleles.Environmental factors like
light, water and nutrients also influence the amount of grain colour. Environmental
variations make the distribution of phenotypes more smooth and continuous.

Human skin colour is also a quantitative trait which is controlled by three to six gene
pairs. The greater the number of pigment specifying genes, the darker the skin. A child
can have darker or lighter skin than his parents.

Human height is a more complex polygenic trait. The perfectly continuous variation
in range of human heights produces a smooth bell - shaped curve (Fig 22-12). A few
people are very tall or very short, but most individuals fall in the average or mean
value. This trait is controlled by many pairs of genes at different loci. Even multiple
alleles may be possible at each locus. More the number of alleles for shortness, the
shorter the height will be. Similarly greater the number of alleles for tallness, the taller

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

15

Number of individuals

0 1 2 3 4 5 6

Fig 22.11 Number of pigment - contributing alleles in F2

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

15

Number of individuals
(In hundreds of thousands)

76°28

raf" 5"

5-56" | 5'6"-6' 6'-6'6"
Short Mean Tall
(average)
Height

Fig.22.12-Human hight is a continously varying trait

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

the height will be. Environment also has a strong influence on height, intelligence and
skin colour in humans. Constant exposure to sun darkens skin. Poor nutrition prevents
achieving genetically determined height. Healthy and encouraging social environment
promotes intellegence.

Activity : Study continuous variations in height and discontinuous variation in tongue
rolling ability Of man and record your observations as histograms.

Frequency histograms illustrate variations. A frequency histogram is a simple graph.
The horizontal or X axis indicates the range of different phenotypes of a trait within a
population. The vertical or Y axis indicates the number of individuals or their percentage
in the population.

Some people can roll their tongue into a distinct U
shape when they extend it out of their mouth. They are |~
called rollers (Fig 22.13). This ability is due to a single ©
dominant gene. It is a discontinous variation inherited —
in simple Mendelian fashion. Its frequency diagram |
forms asymmetric distribution curve, with much greater
frequency of phenotypes at one end than at the other.

Human height is a continuously varying trait. If we plot a frequency diagram of heights
of humans in a large population, so many phenotypes are found with categories
blending into one another. It forms a smooth bell shaped normal distribution curve.
Measure the heights of a fairly large number of students in your college in cms, each
to the nearest centimeter. Also note the ability of each student as roller or non roller.
Record your observation in a table like this.

Roller/ Non-Roler
a a GC

@)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

400
400
260
w 220 360
330
3 2380
= o49 280
i 240
= 200
200
s 160
E 120 er
z 120
#0
40 *
- 40
156 160 165 #8170 175 180 #185 190 0
Height class (em) Rollers ————_~=S— Non-rollers
(a) ib)

Fig 22.14 Comparison of a continuous and a discontineous variation in human

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Representing each measurement class as a bar with its height proportional to the
number of individuals in each class, plot the graph (Fig 22-14).

GENE LINKAGE

Every organism possesses numerous characters controlled by thousands of genes,
but the number of chromosomes is limited. .Therefore, each chromosome must carry
many genes on it. All the genes located on the same chromosome are linked to each
other. This phenomenon of staying together of all the genes of a chromosome is called
linkage. Gene linkage is a physical relationship between genes. A chromosome carries
its linked genes en bloc in the form of a linkage group. The number of linkage groups
corresponds to the number of homologous pairs of chromosomes. Man has 23 linkage
groups. Genes for colour blindness, haemophilia, gout etc form one linkage group on
human X - chromosome. Similarly, gene for sickle cell anaemia, leukemia and albinism
make another linkage group on human chromosome 11. Linked genes whose loci are
close to each other do not obey Mendel'’s law of independent assortment, because
these cannot assort independently during meiosis. Gene linkage also minimizes the
chances of genetic recombination and variations among offspring.

Animation 22: Gene Linkage
Point Pleasant Beach High Schoo


22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

CROSSING OVER

Linked genes can be separated by crossing over. Closer the two gene loci, more
strongly are their genes linked. The farther apart two genes lie, greater are chances
of their separation through crossing over. Crossing over is an exchange of segments
between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes during meiosis.’ Let
us visualize crossing over by considering only one pair of homologous chromosome
(Fig. 22-16). The homologous chromosomes pair up lengthwise, point to point and
locus to locus. One homologue carries genes ‘A’ and ‘B \ the other homologue has
‘a’ with ‘b’. Chiasmata are formed at many places between non-sister chromatids of
homologous chromosomes. Crossing over occurs at 4 strand stage between non-sister
chromatids. It may take place at more than one place along a chromosome. Exchange of
chromosome segments logically means exchange of DNA, i.e. genes or alleles. As alleles
of non-sister chromatids are different, an exchange between their segments results in
recombination of genes. Allele ‘b’ crosses over to homologue containing allele ‘A’; and
allele ‘B’ comes on the homologue of ‘a’. Then homologous chromosomes separate
by opening up chiasmata. The sister chromatids also separate from each other and
each becomes an independent chromosome to move singly in each of the four haploid
gametes. Four types of gametes are formed; two with parental combinations of linked
genes, i.e. AB and ab, and two with recombination of genes, i.e. Ab and aB. If crossing
over does not occur, only the two parental types of gametes are formed. Parental
types of gametes produce parental types of offspring, while recombination gametes
produce recombinant types of offspring.

Animation 22: Crossing Over
IF SOUP

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Recombination types

Recombination frequency = A
Sum of all combinations

Parental

with no
crossover Parental
between

Parental

Metosis
crossover Recombmant
between ~

Benes

Parental

Fig 22.16 Crossing over recombine genes.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Cross Over or Recombination Frequency

It is the proportion of recombinant types between two gene pairs as compared to the

sum of all combinations.
The recombination frequencies between two linked genes can be calculated by

backcrossing the heterozygote to a homozygous double recessive (Fig. 22-17).

Gametes
A b
Pe
Recombinant
4 R types
es
a B
a ee a — EE ee
a B
pc lk;$elLhm;TT EE Oe
a b

Parental types Recombinant types
(40 + 40 = 80) (10+ 10 = 20)

20
Recombination = ——_..__ «x 100
40+ 40+ 10+ 10

Offspring :

Precyieerie:)

20
- x 100 =20%

100

Fig 22.17 Recombination frequency between two linked genes.


22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

The recombination frequency is directly

proportional to the distance between the A B
linked gene loci. Genes can be mapped

on a chromosome on the basis of their

recombination frequencies. If 1% of

recombination frequency is equal to 1 unit

map distance, the two linked genes A and B a+— 20 —+)
with a 20% recombination frequency must 0 70
be 20 units apart.

Crossing over produces genetic variations

among offspring. Genetic variations lead to tremendous variations in their traits.
Variations provide raw material for evolution by letting them adapt successfully to the
changing environment.

SEX DETERMINATION

Sex Chromosomes

The search for mechanism of inheritance of sex started after discovery of Mendel’s
wlork in 1900. A clear picture of the genetic basis of sex determination emerged after
the discovery of sex chromosomes.

The fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster has eight chromosomes in the form of four
homologous pairs. T.H. Morgan(1911) noticed a peculiar differencein the chromosomes
of male and female Drosophila (Fig 22-18). The chromosomes of the three homologous
pairs were similar in both of the sexes, but the fourth pair was very different. The
female had two similar rod shaped X-chromosomes in the fourth pair, while the male
had one rod shaped X-chromosome but the other a morphologically different, J-shaped
Y chromosome in the fourth heteromorphic pair. X and Y chromosomes are called sex-
chromosomes because these have genes for determination of sex. Chromosomes of
the other three pairs are autosomes. All chromosomes other than sex-chromosomes
are called autosomes. Autosomes do not carry any sex determining gene.

@)

S

Diploid chromasome
complement in cells
of male

Diploid chromasome
complement in cells
of female

Female

Fig 22.18 Chromosomed of and _ Dorsophila melanogaster.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Humans have 46 chromosomes in the form of 23 pairs. 22 pairs are of autosomes
and one pair is of sex-chromosomes. Autosome pairs are common in both the sexes
but the 23 rd sex chromosome, pair is very different in males and females (Fig. 22-
19). A woman has two similar X chromosomes in her 23rd pair but a man has an X
chromosome along with a much shorter Y chromosome in his 23rd pair. The 23rd pair
in man is heteromorphic. She is XX but he is XY.

SRY is the male determining gene. It is located at the tip of short arm of Y-chromosome.
Its name SRY stands for “Sex determining regions of Y.”

xX chromosome Y chromosome

Fig 22.19 Sex Chromosomes of a man

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

In some grasshoppers males and females have different number of chromosomes.
The female has 24 chromosomes in the form of 11 pairs of autosomes and a pair of
X chromosomes. But the male grasshopper has 23 chromosomes. He has 11 pairs of
autosomes and only one X chromosome. The other member for sex chromosome pair
is entirely missing in male. Thus male is XO and female is XX.

Patterns of Sex Determination

There is a wide variety of sex determining ‘ mechanisms but three patterns are more,
pommon.

1. XO - XX Type This pattern of sex determination is found Tn grasshopper and Protenor bug. Male
is XO because it has only one X chromosome. The other sex chromosome is missing entirely. Male
is heterogametic because. it forms t\yp | types of sperms; half the sperms have X ‘ chromosome
while the othher half are without any sex chromosome. A gamefe wtihout any sex chromosome is
called nullo geamete.

Female is XX, because it has two X -chromosomes. It is homogametic, it forms only
one type of eggs. Every egg carries an X chromosome. Sex of the offspring depends on
the kind of sperm that fertilizes the egg. If an X-carrying sperm fertilizes the egg, an XX
female offspring is produced. If the nubo

sperm fertilizes the egg, an XO male offspring is produced (Fig. 22-20). Sex ratio between
male and female offspring is 1:1.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

P, Ox x CO xo
Gametes (&) = +(0)
igo Sperms
¥
F, x XO
Sex - ratio 1

Fig 22.20 Sex determination in grass hopper and Protenor bug.

This pattern of sex determination is found in Drosophila, man and many
other organisms. Male is XY and female is XX. Male being heterogametic produces two
types of sex-determining sperms. Half the sperms carry X-chromosome and the other
half carry Y - chromosome. Chances for both types of sperms are equal.

Female being homogametic produces only one type of eggs, each with anX chromosome.
Sex of the offspring is determined by the type of sperm. If an X - carrying sperm fertilizes
the egg, the zygote will be XX, and a female offspring is produced. If a Y - carrying sperm
fertilizes the egg, the zygote will be XY, and a male offspring will be produced. The sex-
ratio between male and female offspring is 1:1. Sex ratio indicates chances of the sex
of the offspring. Chances for a son or daughter in human birth are equal (Fig. 22.21).

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

P. O XX x CO xy
ome @  1@ +1@
Kgg Sperms
Ld
F, XX XO
2 of
Sex - ratio 1 : 1

Fig 22.21 Sex Determination in man and Drosp

3. ZZ-ZW Type: This type of sex - determination pattern is common in birds,
butterflies and moths. It was discovered by J. Seiler in 1914 in moth. It is the reverse
of XY - XX system. Here the female is heterogametic ZW but the male is homogametic
ZZ. Female produces two kinds of eggs Z and W in equal proportions. All sperms are
alike, each carrying a Z - chromosome. It is the kind of egg that determines the sex

of offspring. When a Z - carrying egg is fertilized by the sperm, a male offspring is
produced, but when a W - carrying egg is fertilized by the sperm a female offspring is
produced. Sex ratio is 1:1 (Fig. 22.22).

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

P, S' ZZ x

Gametes Sperms @)

F, VA “AW
2 os
Sex - ratio 1 5 1

Fig 22.22 Sex determination in birds and butterflies.

Comparison of chromosomal determination of sex

between Drosophila and Humans

Although both Drosophila and humans follow the same XY - XX sex determining
pattern, yet there is a basic technical difference between the two. Presence of ‘SRY’
gene on Y chromosome is essential for triggering the development of maleness in
humans. Absence of Y chromosome simply leads to the female development path. XO
Turner's syndrome in humans produced through non-disjunction is a sterile female.
But in Drosophila XO is a sterile male. Similarly XXY individual produced through non
disjunctional gametes in humans is a sterile male called Klinefelter’s syndrome, but the
Same XXY set of chromosomes in Drosophila produces a fertile female (Fig. 22-23).

DROSOPHILA

Fig 22.23 Comparison of sex determination in man and Dorsophilia


22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

There is a close genic balance between genes of different chromosomes. Drosophila
has an X chromosome-autosome balance system. Its Y chromosome appears to have
very little influence on sex. Here actually the X chromosome is female determining and
the autosomes are male determining. Sex of an individual depends more on the number
of X chromosomes relative to the number of sets of autosomes. An X: A ratio of 1.00 or
higher produces female whereas an X: A ratio of 0.5 or lower produces males.

Sex Determination in Plants

Plants show a variety of sexual situations. Some species like Ginkgo are dioecious having
plants of separate sexes. Male plants produce flowers with only stamens and female
plants produce flowers with only carpels. Some dioecious plants have a difference
of sex chromosomes between the sexes. These have an X - Y system. These plants
typically exhibit an X - chromosome - autosome balance system for sex determination.
Many other sex - determining mechanisms are also seen in dioecious plants. Correns
(1907) discovered that pollens of certain plants were sex - determining. All eggs are of
one type. Pollens of the two types are produced in equal number. One kind of pollen
after fertilizing the egg produces male plant whereas the other kind of pollen after

fertilization produces female plant (Fig. Aa aa,
22-24), Male x Female

} ; Gametes
Many species of eukaryotic micro

organisms like yeast do not have sex
chromosome. These depend on genic

system for determination of sex. In this

system the sexes are specified by simple C1)
allelic differences at a small number of Pollens

gene loci e.g., a and a are the two mating

types (Sexes) of yeast, controlled by MAT
a and MAT a alleles respectively.

Fig 22.24 Pollens determines Sex

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
SEX LINKAGE

Sex Linkage in Drosophila
Thomas HuntMorgan(1910) provided experimental evidenceinsupportofchromosomal
theory of heredity through discovery of sex linkage in fruitfly Drosophila.

Drosophila is a very useful organism for genetic studies for many reasons: *

1.

The tiny fly is often seen hovering over rotten fruits. It can be easily collected and
cultured on mashed banana and other fruits. It does not need large spacious cages.
It lives happily in ordinary glass bottle of jams and marmalades. It eats yeast that
grows on mashed banana.

. Male and female Drosophila show sexual dimorphism i.e. these are morphologically

distinct from each other. Male is smaller in size with black rounded abdomen. Female
is larger with pointed abdomen. Male has sex combs on front legs.

. Drosophila has a generation time of just two weeks. It lays a large number of eggs

which hatch out into fertile offspring. Many generations can be raised in a relatively
short time.

. 4. Drosophila is perfectly suited for genetic studies. It shows fairly large number of

distinct contrasting traits. Morgan and his colleagues studied pattern of inheritance
of more than 85 traits of Drosophila. Its larvae are excellent material for dissection
for chromosome study. It has only eight chromosomes in four homologous pairs
that can be conveniently studied under a microscope. Its salivary gland cells have
giant chromosomes in their nuclei. These giant chromosomes have characteristic
banding patterns corresponding to genes.

. 5. The entire genome of Drosophila has been successfully sequenced as part of

human genome project.

Morgan raised cultures of Drosophila flies to study different traits, such as colour of
the eye. Normal fruit flies, the wild type, have bright red eyes. One of his coworkers
Calvin Bridges, observed an unusual white eye mutant male fly. (Fig. 22.25).

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Red eyed female White eyed male

Fig 22.25 Wild type red eyed female and mutant white eyed male Dorsophilia

Morgan mated this white eyed male with a wild type red eyed female. All 1237 offspring
of this cross had red eyes. Morgan concluded that red eye is a dominant trait (Fig 22-

26a).

Morgan allowed males and females of F( generation to mate and produce F2 generation.
He counted 2459 red-eyed females, 1,011 red-eyed males and 782 white eye males

among F2 (Fig. 22.26b).

The proportion of 3470 red eyed to 782 white eyed flies did not perfectly fit into
Mendelian 3 : 1 ratio. The number of recessive phenotype individuals was too small.
There was another pecularity in this result. All the white-eyed flies were only males.
There was no white eye female in F2 generation.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

The inheritance of eye colour some how seemed to be related to the ‘sex’ of the
offspring. Morgan proposed that:

(i) The gene for eye colour is located on X chromosome, (ii) the alleles for eye colour
are present only on X chromosome. There is no corresponding allele for this trait on Y
chromosome.

Thus even a single recessive allele on X chromosome can express itself in males because
Y chromosome is empty for that gene. Males are hemizygous as they carry just one
allele on their only X chromosome. Females have two X’chromosomes, each carrying
an allele of the trait. Females can be homozygous or heterozygous.

Symbol “w” represents the recessive allele for white eye, and “w+” designates its wild
type allele for red eye. The genotypes of the parents of Pi cross were: Xw+ Xw+ for red
eye female, and Xw Y for the white eye male.

Morgan's hypothesis explained clearly why all the white eyed flies in F2 generation
were only males.

Step 3: Test cross : Morgan wanted to test his hypothesis (Fig. 22-26c). He crossed the
P| white eyed male (XWY) with one of its own daughters, the red eyed heterozygous
female from F| generation. This test cross produced 129 red-eyed females, 132 red-
eyed males, 88 white-eyed females and 86 white eyed males. White-eyed flies were
less viable than red-eyed flies. Half the female offspring in fact had red eyes and half
had white. Similarly half the males had red eyes and half had white.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

First Step Cross :
P, Red eyed female x White eyed male
pte Saks x’ Y

camer 0 a(R) m(@)
eggs

Sperms
» Oa xy
F, Red eyed female Red eyed male
D0% 50%
Fig 22.16(a)

Second Step Cross :
Fix Fi Red eyed female x Red eyed male

Xx wit 5 iia x" Y

a0 (=) a0
Sperms

Gametes s0%e(X") 506 oO)
Eggs

eS
xB

5 aie eal ‘TE xX™'y X"¥Y
F, Hed eyed Red eyed Red eyed White eyed
female female male male
2459 1011 782

Fig 22.26(b)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

RedeyedfemaleofF. xX White eyed male of P.
>. Coated Gale XY
Gametes 50%e(X") 50ce(X™) 50% =) 50s ¥ )
Eggs Sperms
x"

Offspring to test cross
Fig 22.26(0)

Pi White eyed female x Red eyed male

EE _ ere =
~“
os al wt
Eggs Sperms

FE, Gee Sa x ¥

Red eyed female White eyed male

Fig 22.26(d)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Step 4: Reciprocal cross as a confirmatory test: Appearance of white eyed female
provided an opportunity for a further confirmatory test. Morgan mated a white eyed
female with a red-eyed male (Fig. 22.26d). All female offspring had red eyes, and all
male offspring had white eyes. Then these Fi red eyed females and white eyed males
were mated to produce F2. Half of the F2 females had red eyes, half had white. Similarly
half of the F2 males had red eyes and half had white. This Fi x Fi cross was exactly like
Step 3 test cross.

A trait whose gene is present on X chromosome is called X - linked trait. X - linked traits
are commonly referred as sex-linked traits. A gene present only on X chromosome,
having no counterpart on Y chromosome, is called X - linked gene.

Sex-linked inheritance follows avery specific pattern. As asoninherits his X chromosome
only from his mother, and a daughter gets an X chromosome from each parent, an X
- linked trait passes in a crisscross fashion from maternal grandfather (Pi) through his
daughter (Fi) to the grandson (F2). It never passes direct from father to son because a
son inherits only Y chromosome from father.

Morgan’s discovery of sex-linked inheritance was a great contribution to the
understanding of genes and chromosome. In 1933, T. H. Morgan was awarded a Nobel
Prize for his contributions to genetics.

Y chromosome is not completely inert. It does carry a few genes which have no
counterpart on X chromosome. Such genes are called Y-Linked genes and their traits
are called Y-linked traits e.g. SRY gene on Y chromosome of man determines maleness.
Y - linked traits are found only in males. These traits directly pass through Y chromosome
from father to son only. As females do not normally inherit Y chromosome, such traits
can not pass to them. Some genes like bobbed gene in Drosophila are present on X and Y
both. These are called X - and - Y linked genes. These are also called pseudoautosomal
genes because their pattern of inheritance is like autosomal genes.

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Sex - Linkage in Humans

Humans have many X-linked traits of which some like haemophilia and colour blindness
are recessive while others like hypophosphatemic or vitamin D resistant rickets are
dominant. X - linked dominant is a trait which is determined by an X linked dominant
gene, while X - linked recessive is a trait that is determined by an X - linked recessive
gene. Their patterns of inheritance are very different from each other.

Marriage line

1 2
X"Y (Father)
Sibship line

(Mother) ¥ x"
Marriage line

' Children

1 2
(Daughter's husband) (Carrier daughter)
X"y xx:

Grandchildren
1 2 3 4

x x® xx" xy xty tl
a Normal male [ | Affected male

Grand Grand Grand Grand
daughter d t
ughter daughter aire sem @ Normal female (e) Carrier female

Fig 22.27 Transmission of X-linked recessive traits(heamophilia) in humans.

G1)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

xX - linked recessive inheritance: Experimental matings are not practically possible in
humans. Mode of inheritance of human traits can be traced through pedigrees.

Genetics of Haemophilia: Haemophiliais a rare X — linked recessive trait. Haemophiliac’s
blood fails to clot properly after an injury, because it has either a reduction or malfunction
or complete absence of blood clotting factors. It is a serious hereditary disease because
a haemophiliac may bleed to death even from minor cuts. Haemophilia is of three types:
A, Band C. Haemophilia A and B are non - allelic recessive sex - linked, but haemophilia
C is an autosomal recessive trait. 80% haemophiliacs, suffer from haemophilia A due
to abnormality of factor VIII, about 20% suffer from haemophilia B due to disturbance
in factor IX, but less than 1% suffer from haemophilia C due to reduction in factor XI.
Being X - linked recessives, haemophilia A and B affect men more than women, but
haemophilia C affects both the sexes equally because it is autosomal. Chances for a
man to be affected by haemophilia A and B are greater than a woman. A woman can
suffer from haemophilia A or B only when she is homozygous for the recessive allele,
but a man with just one recessive allele will display the trait. Haemophilia A and B
zigzag from maternal grandfather through a carrier daughter to a grandson. It never
passes direct from father to son. Gene for normal is H. Gene for haemophilia A is h.
In generation | of this pedigree (Fig. 22.27) a man (I - 2) suffering from haemophilia A
marries a normal woman (I - 1). He passes haemophilia gene to his daughter (Il - 2)
through his X chromosome. He cannot pass this gene to his son (II - 3) because the son
receives only Y chromosome from him. His daughter (Il - 2) also receives another X but
with normal dominant allele from her mother (I - 1).

The daughter looks phenotypically normal, but she is heterozygous and a carrier for
the recessive gene. When she marries a normal man (Il - 1) she passes her father’s
trait to one of her two sons (HI - 4) who inherits grandfather's X from her. The single
recessive allele for haemophilia expresses successfully in the hemizygous son because
his Y chromosome does not carry its counterpart. The other son (Ill - 3) is normal as he

G2)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Many X - linked traits in man are also found X - linked in other mammals like mouse,
rabbit, dog, sheep, horse, donkey, cattle, kangaroo and chimpanzee.Was the
mammalian X chromosome conserved throughout mammalian evolution?

inherits grand mother’s X with normal gene, One daughter (Ill - 1) with both normal X
is normal, but the other daughter (Ill - 2) is carrier like her mother.

Activity: Cases of Haemophilia A are reported in Queen Victoria’s family. Pedigree of
Queen Victoria’s family (Fig. 22.28) indicates that Queen Victoria was a carrier mother,
because she gave birth to an affected son Prince Leopold. Prince Leopold passed on
this recessive X - linked trait in typical zigzag fashion through his carrier daughter (III -
1) to his grandson Rupert (IV - 1). Assign genotype to each individual. Can you explain
how Alexis (IV - 3) became haemophiliac?

©

Qneen victoria

ap (*)

Prince Leopold Princess Alice

amp @ ©

Tsar Nicholas IT} Princess Alex

(IV)
Rupert Alexis

KEY: Normal female Normal male (*) Carrier fomale | Affected male

Fig 22.28 Pedigree of Queen Victoris’s family showing cases of Hemolhilia A.

G3)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

‘Genetics of colour-blindness

Normal trichromatic colour vision is based on three different kinds of cone cells in
the retina, each sensitive to only one of the three primary colours, red, green or blue.
Each type of cone cell has specific light absorbing proteins called opsins. The genes for
red and green opsins are on X chromosome, while the gene for blue opsin is present
on autosome 7. Mutations in opsin genes cause three types of colour-biindness. A
dichromat can perceive two primary colours but is unable to perceive the one whose
opsins are missing due to mutation. Protanopia is red blindness, deuteranopia is green
blindness, while tritanopia is blue blindness. Some people can detect red and green but
with altered perception of the relative shades of these colours. They have abnormal
but still partially functional opsins. They are protanomalous and deuteranomalous
for red and green weakness respectively. A monochromat can perceive one colour.
Monochromacy is true colour-blindness. Blue cone monochromacy is an X - linked
recessive trait in which both red and green cone cells are absent. That is why it is also
called red - green colour-blindness. It is a common hereditary disease. Like any sex
- linked recessive trait, it also zigzags from maternal grandfather through a carrier
daughter to a grandson. It never passes direct from father to son. This type of colour-
blindness is more common in men than women, because chances for a male to be
affected by it are muh more than a female.

Activity: A sex-linked recessive allele “c” produces red - blindness. Its normal dominant
allele is “C”. A normal woman whose father was red-blind, marries a red-blind man.
What proportion of their children can have normal colour vision?

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

X-linked dominant inheritance : Pattern of X - linked dominant inheritance is different
from X - linked recessive. It is more common in females than males. All daughters of an
affected father, but none of his sons are affected. Any heterozygous affected mother
will pass the trait equally to half of her sons and half of her daughters (Fig. 22.29).
Hypophosphatemiic rickets is an X - linked dominant trait. It is a rare hereditary disease.
It is different from common dietary rickets, which could be cured by taking vitamin D.
It does not result from vitamin D deficiency but its cause is a genetic communication
failure at molecular level. The genes encoding bone proteins never receive vitamin D’s
message to function.

xoyv

KEY:
Gene for normal = d
Gene for
Hypophosphatemic = D

xx xx" XY XY rickets

Fig 22.29 Tranmission Of X-linked dominant traits in humanss.

G5)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Y - Linked inheritance : Pattern of Y - linked inheritance is very peculiar. Maleness is a
Y - linked trait. Y - linked trait passes through Y - chromosome from father to son only.
Such traits cannot pass to daughters because they do not inherit Y - chromosome.
All sons of an affected father are affected by a Y - linked trait (Fig. 22.30). SRY’ gene
on Y chromosome determines maleness in man. It is male sex switch which triggers
developmental process towards maleness after 6 week pregnancy.

SRY

wy XY xy XY XX

KEY: ®@ Female (unaffected) [| Male (affected’

Fig 22.30 Y-linked inheritance in man

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Sex Limited Trait

A sex-limited trait is limited to only one sex due to anatomical differences. Such trait
affects a structure or function of the body present in only males or only females. These
trails may be controlled by sex-linked or autosomal genes. Genes for milk yield in dairy
cattle affect only cows. Similarly beard growth in humans is limited to men. A woman
does not grow a beard herself but she can pass the genes specifying heavy beard growth
to her sons.

Sex Influenced Trait

Sex influenced trait occurs in both males and females but it is more common in one sex.
It is controlled by an allele that is expressed as dominant in one sex but recessive in the
other. This difference in expression is due to hormonal difference between the sexes.
Pattern baldness is a sex influenced trait. Many more men than women are bald. It is
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait in males but as an autosomal recessive trait
in females. A heterozygous male is bald but a heterozygous female is not. Awoman can
be bald only when she is homozygous recessive.

Activity: Aman is 45 years old and bald. His wife also has pattern baldness. What is the
risk that their son will lose his hair?

DIABETES MELLITUS AND ITS GENETIC BASIS

Diabetes mellitus is a hereditary disease. It is actually a heterogenous group of disorders
which are characterized by elevated blood sugar level. Diabetics are unable to metabolise
blood sugar in their body. They pass glucose in their urine. Diabetes is the leading cause
of kidney failure, adult blindness, lower limb amputation and heart disease.

There are two major types of diabetes: Type | is IDDM or insulin dependent diabetes
mellitus. Type Il is NIDDM or non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Type | is also
called Juvenile diabetes because it usually occurs in early age before 40. It arises due to
deficiency of pancreatic hormone insulin that normally routes blood glucose to cells for
use. Type lis an auto immune disorder. The immune system backfires and manufactures
auto antibodies against body's own cells. Sometimes, specific viral infections activate
auto immune response. T - cells of immune system attack pancreas and destroy insulin
producing (5 - cells. As a result, pancreas does not produce insulin. Diabetics of type |
must receive exogenous (from outside source) insulin to survive.

©)

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Progress is being made in understanding the genetic basis of this disease. The *insulin
gene is located on short arm of chromosome 11. Polymorphism and genetic variations
within this locus is responsible for diabetes type | susceptibility. But today, it is no
more just a recessive single gene trait, rather it is a multifactorial (polygenic with
environmental influence) inheritance associated with several alleles.

Diabetes mellitus type II is non insulin dependent. It accounts for 90% of all diabetic
patients. These persons produce some endogenous insulin themselves, but their
body cells gradually fail to respond to insulin and cannot take up glucose from blood.
They develop a sort of insulin resistance. It occurs among people over the age of
40, and is more common among the obese. Obesity increases insulin resistance. As
exercise reduces obesity it indirectly increases insulin sensitivity and improves glucose
tolerance.

There, definitely exists a genetic component in the form of an underlying tendency
to develop diabetes under certain environmental conditions. About 2% - 5% of type II
diabetics get the disease early in life, before 25 years of age. It is called maturity onset
diabetes of the young (MODY). MODY can be inherited as an autosomal dominant
trait. About 50% of cases of MODY are caused by mutations in glucokinase gene.
Glucokinase enzyme usually converts glucose to glucose - 6 - phosphate in pancreas.
MODY can also be caused by mutations in any of the four other genes which encode
transcription factors involved in pancreatic development and insulin regulation. But
these four MODY genes do not play any significant role in adult - onset type II.


22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Q1_sCFill in the blanks.

1. is the basic unit of biological information.

2. Asudden change in the structure of ageneis called

3 is the chance of an event to occur.

4. Across among monohybrids is a cross.

5. An individual with a homozygous genotype is called

6. Different alleles of a gene that are both expressed in a heterozygote are
called

7. When a heterozygote exceeds the phenotypic expression of both the homozygotes
the phenomenon _ is called

8. Whena single gene affects two or more traits, the phenomenon is called

9. Agene with multiple phenotypic effect is called

10. The phenomenon of staying together of all the genes of a chromosome is
called

11. minimizes the chances of genetic recombination.

12. isanexchange ofsegments between non-sister chromatids ofhomologous
chromosomes during meiosis.

13. All cliromosomes other than sex chromosomes are called

14. is the maleness determining gene in man.
15. Type of diabetes mellitus is non insulin dependent.
16. Polygenic inheritance with environmental influence is called inheritance.

Q.2 Short questions.

. In grasshopper, the male has XY and the female has XX types of sex chromosomes.
. Pea is normally a self fertilizing plant.

. Dihybrids are offspring of the parents who differ in one contrasting pair of trait.

. X-linked traits pass direct from father to son.

. Aperson suffering from Blue cone monochromacy can not see blue colour.

. In birds and moths eggs determine sex.

. Ahomozygote forms all gametes of the same type.

. The allele for a sex limited trait is dominant in one sex but recessive in the other.

CON DU KRWDN >

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

9.

Pattern baldness is a sex influenced trait.

10. Carriers of haemophilia show no symptoms of the disease.
Q.4 Short Questions.

1.

Differentiate between:

Phenotype and genotype Gene and allele

Homozygous and heterozygous Monohybrid and dihybrid
Autosome and sex chromosome Dominance and epistasis
Allele and multiple allele X-linked trait and Y-linked trait

Incomplete dominance and codominance |Sex limited and sex influenced trait
Continuous and discontinuous variations | Dominant trait and recessive trait
Wild type and mutant

9.

. What is a gene pool?
. Was pea a lucky choice for Mendel? What would have happened if he had studied

an eighth character?

. What is a test cross? Why did Mendel devise this cross?
. What would happen if alleles of a pair do not segregate at meiosis? How would it

affect the purity of gamete?

_ If the alleles do not assort independently, which type of combination is missing in

the progeny.

. Why has each gamete equal chance of getting one or the other allele of a pair?
. Does the dominant allele modify the determinative nature of its recessive partner?.

What sort of relationship do they have?
Which type of traits can assort independently?

10. Why does the blood group phenotype of a person remain constant throughout

life’?

11. What is a universal blood donor?

12. How can you protect the baby against Rh - incompatibility?

13. Which type of genes do not obey law of independent assortment?
14. How can linked genes be separated from each other ?

15. What is multifactorial inheritance?

16. What is MODY?

17. Can a child have more intelegence (IQ score) than his parents?

22. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab

Q.4 Extensive Questions

. What is incomplete dominance? Explain it with an example.

. Define Mendel’s law of segregation. Explain it with an example.

. Define Mendel’s law of independent assortment. Explain it with an example.

. Define probability. Derive 9:3:3:1 F2‘ratio of independent assortment through
product rule.

. What is codominance? Explain the phenomenon of codominance with an example.

. Define multiple alleles. Describe multiple allelic blood group system of man.

. What is Rh factor? Describe the genetic basis of Rh - blood group system of man.

. What is erythroblastosis foetalis? Discuss this adverse effect of Rh incompatibility?
Also suggest a therapy to avoid Rh sensitization of an Rh” mother married to an Rh+
man.

9. Define epistasis. Explain epistatic gene interaction with an example.

10. What is a pleiotropic gene? Discuss pleiotropy with examples.

11. What are polygenes? Explain polygenic inheritance.

12. Whatis crossing over? Define recombination frequency and explain its significance.

13. What are sex-chromosomes? Discuss the chromosomal patterns of sex

determination in organisms.

14. Compare chromosomal determination of sex between Drosophila and humans.

15. Define gene pool. Explain the concept of gene pool in a sample population.

16. What is sex linkage? Explain T. H. Morgan's study of sex - linkage in Drosophila.

17. Compare the pattern of inheritance of an X - linked dominant trait with an X -

linked recessive trait in humans.

18. Explain diabetes mellitus and its genetic basis.

19. Discuss the genetics of colour-blindness or haemophilia.

KR WN >

CON OD WU

CHAPTER

om ~=—sBIO TECHNOLOGY

Animation 23 : Biotechnolog

ource & Credit: Wikispaces


23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Since Mendel’s work was rediscovered in 1900, geneticists have made startling advances
which have led to a new era of DNA technology. Modem techniques enable

desired substance, for example insulin. Notvery long ago, people with insulin dependent
they receive human insulin, a product of biotechnology. Since the 1980s, biotechnology
has produced drugs and vaccines to curb human illnesses.

Genetically, engineered bacteria have been used to clean up environmental pollutants,
increase the fertility of the soil, and kill insect pests. Biotechnology also extends beyond
multicellular organisms. It is now possible to alter the genotype and subsequently the
phenotype of plants and animals. Indeed, gene therapy in humans, attempting to repair
a faulty gene is already undergoing clinical trials. There are those who are opposed to
manipulation of genes for any reason. Although, there have been no ill effects as yet,
they fear the possibility of health and ecological repercussions in the future.

Cloning of a gene

Produces many identical copies. Recombinant DNA technology is used when a very
large quantity of a gene is required. The use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) creates
a lesser number of copies within a laboratory test tube.

Recombinant DNA Technology

Recombinant DNA technology popularly known as genetic engineering aims at

synthesizing recombinant DNA which contains DNA from two different sources. In

order to produce recombinant DNA, the following are required:

1. Gene of interest, which is to be cloned.

2. Molecular scissors to cut out the gene of interest.

3. Molecular carrier or vector, on which gene of interest could be placed.

4. The gene of interest alongwith the vector is then introduced into an expression
system, as a result of which a specific product is made.

@)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

How to get a gene?

There are three possible ways to get the gene of interest.
(a) to isolate it from the chromosome

(b) to synthesize it chemically, and

(c) to make it from MRNA

Genes can be isolated from the chromosomes by cutting the chromosomes on the
flanking sites of the gene using special enzymes known as restriction endonucleases.
If, however, the genes are small, they can also be synthesized in the laboratory.
Another very common method of getting the gene is to synthesize it in the laboratory
from messenger RNA, using reverse transcriptase. This DNA molecule is called
complementary DNA (cDNA).

Molecular Scissors: Restriction Endonucleases

These are natural enzymes of bacteria, which they use for their own protection against
viruses. The restriction enzyme cuts down the viral DNA, but does no harm to the
bacterial chromosofhe. They are called restriction enzymes because they restrict the
growth of viruses. In 1970, Hamilton O. Smith, at Johns Hopkins University, isolated the
first restriction enzyme. Bacteria produce a variety of such restriction enzymes, which
cut the DNA at very specific sites characterized by specific sequence of four or six
nucleotides arranged symmetrically in the reverse order. Such sequences are known
as palindromic sequences. So far more than 400 such enzymes have been isolated out
of which about 20 are frequently used in recombinant DNA technology.

EcoRI, a commonly used restriction enzyme, cuts double-stranded DNA when it has
this sequence of bases at the cleavage site (Fig. 23.1). Notice there is now a gap into
which a piece of foreign DNA can be placed, if it ends in bases complementary to those
exposed by the restriction enzyme. The single stranded but complementary ends of the
two DNA molecules are called “sticky ends” because they can bind by complementary
base pairing. They, therefore, facilitate the insertion of foreign DNA into vector DNA.

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

DNA
duplex

enzyme

t | “Sticky ends”

Fig, 23.1 Restriction enzyme ECoRI, cuts this specific sequence of nucleotides in such a way that sticky ends are
produced.

| Restriction

Molecular Carrier: Vector

To make recombinant DNA, one often begins by selecting a vector, the means by
which recombinant DNA is introduced into a host cell. One common type of vector
is a plasmid. Plasmids were discovered by investigators studying the sex life of the

intestinal bacterium Escherichia colli.

Plasmids are natural extra-chromosomal circular DNA molecules which carry genes for
antibiotic resistance and fertility etc. One of the plasmids discovered earlier pSC 101 has
antibiotic resistance gene for tetracycline, whereas pBR 322 has antibiotic resistance
genes for tetracycline as well as ampicillin. Inserting gene of interest in tetracycline
resistant gene of plasmid pBR 322 would enable separating out colonies of bacteria in

a medium containing ampicillin and vice versa.

©

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Recombinant DNA

For preparation of a recombinant DNA, the plasmid is cut with the same enzyme which
was used for isolation of the gene of interest (Fig. 23.2). The gene of interest (insulin)
is then joined with the sticky ends produced after cutting the plasmid with the help of
another special enzyme knqwn as DNA ligase. This enzyme seals the foreign piece of
DNA into the vector. Now the two different pieces of DNA have been joined together,
which is now known as recombinant DNA or chimaeric DNA

Animation 23.1: Recombinant DNA

ource & Credit:Pinterest

©)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

O
DNA
Restriction Bacterium

Human cell a
Be ne DNA

——

Insulin gene

DNA ligase seals i a gene and plasmd
which have identical
oe ends

Recombinant DNA

Host cell takes up ‘poombinan plasmid

When bacteria ae S aren n clones are produced

_&O O®
BO’,

ol

»* rs
Cloned Dae gene Insulin protein
can be isolated can be isolated

Fig. 23.2 Cloning of a gene.

©)

A clone can be a large number of molecules (i.e. cloned genes) or cells (i.e. cloned
bacteria) or organisms that are identical to an original specimen. Fig. 23.3 compares the
use of aplasmid and avirus to clone a gene. Bacterial cells take up recombinant plasmid,
especially, if they are treated with calcium chloride to make them more permeable.
Thereafter, as the cell reproduces, a bacterial clone forms and each new cell contains at
least one plasmid. Therefore, each of the bacteria contains the gene of interest, which
will express itself and make a product. From this bacterial clone, the cloned gene can
be isolated for further analysis, or protein product can be separated (Fig 23.2). Besides
plasmids, the DNA of bacterial viruses (for example, lambda phage) can also be used
as a vector. After lambda phage attaches to a host bacterium, recombinant DNA is
released from the virus and enters the bacterium. Here, it will direct the reproduction
of many more viruses. Each virus in bacteriophage clone contains a copy of the gene
being cloned (Fig. 23.3).

Removal of vector Recombinant DNA taken up by host Cloning of gene
Recombinant DNA

=,

1} id r "
7. il plasmid DB
hd ‘laa i ‘\ we, ‘

Bacterium —— > wl —- Host cell J D,

Plasmid DNA Foreign gene

Recombinant DNA
Virus Recombinant

= a DNA, ( | ‘SB
o —@_ Gar

Viral DNA ~~ — QO
Foreign gene Host cell

Fig. 23.3 Plasmid DNA (upper part of figure) as well as viral DNA (lower part of the figure) can be used as vectors for cloning gene
of interes

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Genoiftic Library

A genome is a full set of genes of an individual. A genomic library is a collection of
bacterial or bacteriophage clones, each clone containing a particular segment of
DNA from the source cell. For making a genomic library, an organism's DNA is simply
sliced up into pieces, and pieces are put into vectors (i.e. plasmids or viruses) that are
taken up by host bacteria as shown in Fig. 23.3. The entire collection of bacterial or
bacteriophage clones that result contains all the genes of that organism.

A particular probe can be used to search a genetic library for a certain gene. A probe
is a Single stranded nucleotide sequence that will hybridize (pair) with a certain piece
of DNA. Location of the probe is possible because the probe is either radioactive or
fluorescent. Bacterial cells, each carrying a particular DNA fragment, can be plated onto
agar in a petri dish. After the probe hybridizes into the gene of interest, the genes can
be isolated from the fragment (Fig 23.4). Now this particular fragment can be cloned
further or even analyzed for its particular DNA sequence.

Fig 23.4 Identification of a cloned gene

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

5’ oo
ey 5:
Heat for 1 minute
to denature (separate)
5’ oa
= ey
Cool for 2 minutes
and add primers
SY iy

Pe Primer
Primer [7]

ee 5’
Add DNA polymerase
and wait 1.5 minuts
i =:
3’ ae
5’ =e
S >

Repeat cycle

Fig 23.5 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)

@)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

The polymerase Chain Reaction

Kary B. Mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in 1983. Earlier methods
of obtaining multiple copies of a specific sequence of DNA were time consuming and
expensive. In contrast, PCR can create millions of copies of a single gene or any specific
piece of DNA quickly in a test tube. PCR is very specific - the targeted DNA sequence
can be less than one part ina million of the total DNA sample. .This means that a single
gene or smaller piece of DNA, among all the human genes can be amplified (copied)
using PCR.

PCR takes its name from DNA polymerase, the enzyme that carries out DNA replication
in a cell. It is considered a chain reaction because DNA polymerase will carry out
replication over and over again, until there are millions of copies of the desired DNA.
PCR does not replace gene cloning, which is still used whenever a large quantity of
gene or protein product is needed.

Before carrying out PCR, primers - sequences of about 20 bases that are complementary
tothe bases on either side of the “target DNA” - must be available. The primers are needed
because DNA polymerase does not start the replication process; it only continues or
extends the process. After the primers bind by complementary base pairing to the
DNA strand, DNA polymerase copies the target DNA (Fig 23.5) .

DNA polymerase used is temperature - insensitive (thermostable) enzyme extracted
from the bacterium Thermus aquaticus, which lives in hot springs. Commonly, this
enzyme is also known as Taq polymerase. It can withstand high temperature, which is
used to separate double stranded DNA, therefore, replication need not be interrupted
by the need to add more enzyme. PCR is done these days in an automatic PCR machine
or thermocycler, which is a routine piece of equipment in any laboratory.

Animation 23.2: PCR

ource & Credit: members.jcom


23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Analyzing DNA

The entire genome of an individual can be subjected to DNA finger printing, a process
described in Fig. 23.6. The genome is treated with restriction enzymes, which results
in a unique collection of different sized fragments. Therefore, restriction fragment
length polymorphism (RFLPs) exists between individuals. During a process called gel
electrophoresis, the fragments can be separated according to their lengths (molecular
weight or size), and the result is a number of bands that are so close together that
they appear as a smear. However, the use of probes for genetic markers produces a
distinctive pattern that can be recorded on X-ray film.

Recomblnant DNA technology and the polymerasw
chain reaction are two ways to clome a gene.

ae 5 pape memaensgi Le

— i

: DN ce

ee ie

A pp rations:

7 i 2 aoe
* =

eM ae ol tag

a a

Fif 23.6 DNA fingerprinting. Three samples of DNA(I, II, /li)were cut with a restriction enzyme and run on agarose gel. The
gel pattren was then transferred to a membrane and DNA was denatured. The denatured DNA on the paper was hybridized
with radioactive probe. Since the radioactive probes and complemetary arrangement of bases to the original DNA ,all DNA
fragments were labelled , which appeared as black bands with autogradiagram.

©)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

The DNA from a single sperm enough to identify a suspected rapist. Since DNA
is inherited, its finger print resembles that of one’s parents. DNA finger printing
successfully identified the remains of a teenager who had been murdered eight years
before because the skeletal DNA was similar to that of the parent’s DNA.

In Fig. 23.7 are given some DNA finger prints. The figure 23.7 (a) shows comparison of
child’s finger print with that of his parents. The child has received DNA from both of
his parents. Arrows indicate that some bands in him are like his father, some like his
mother. Some bands are. however, unique to him, which do not match with any of the
parents.

Fig. 23.7 (b) shows a case of disputed parenthood. Two persons F, and F, claim to be the
father of child C, whose mother’s finger print is given under M. The child has received
DNA from both of his parents. Obviously F,is not the real father.

The arrows on left side show common bands between mother and child while those on
right show common bands between the father and the child.

Fig. 23.7(c) shows DNA finger prints which have been presented as forensic evidence. A
criminal on a deserted place assaulted a woman. She scratched his face in her defence
but he murdered her and ran away. Forensic scientist recovered murder’s hair and skin
cells from underneath her nails. They prepared DNA finger prints from blood of victim,
from murderer's skin and hair, and from three suspects blood. Can you compare them
for specific DNA sequence and tell who is in guilty and who is not? The suspect 1 has
finger prints, which is similar to linger print from skin cells taken from underneath nails
of the victim.Therefore suspect 1 is the culprit. The suspect 2 and 3 are not.

PCR amplification and analysis can be used (1) to diagnose viral infections, genetic
disorders, and cancer (2) in forensic laboratories to identify criminals; and (3) to
determine the evolutionary history’ of human population. It has been possible to
sequence DNA taken from a 76,000 years old mummified human braiti and from a 17
to 20 million years old plant fossil following PCR amplification.

@)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Vietim's
blood

(b)
Fig 23.7(a) Comparison of a child’s DNA _ (b) DNA fingerprints as evidence for paternity. _ (c) DNA Test - a powerful tool of
fingerprint (c) with his parent’s DNA forensic science.
fringerpints (Mand F),

Gene Sequencing

In the late 1970s, methods were developed that allowed the nucleotide sequence of

any purified DNA fragement to be determined simply and quickly. The main principle

of these methods is :

1. To generate pieces of DNA of different sizes all starting from the same point and
ending at different points.

2. Separation of these different pieces of DNA on agarose gel.

3. Reading of sequence from the gel.

@)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

For generation of different sized DNA fragments, two methods arc generally used. One
is Sanger’s, method in which dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates arc used to terminate
DNA synthesis at different sites. The other method is known as Maxam-Giibcrt method
in which DNA threads are chemically cut into pieces of different sizes

Fig 23.8 The enzymatic or dideoxy method of sequencing DNA

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Fig 23.8 shows typical gel obtained after dideoxy method. The volume of DNA sequence
information is now so large that powerful computers must be used to store and analyze
it. DNA sequence is now completely automated, robotic devices mix the reagents and
then load, run and read the order of the nucleotide bases from the gel. This is facilitated
by using chain terminating nucleotides that are each labelled with a different colored
fluorescent dye; in this case, all four synthesis reactions can be performed in the same
tube, and the products can be separated in a single lane of a gel. A detector positioned
near the bottom of the gel reads and records the color of fluorescent label on each band
as it passes through a laser beam. A computer then reads and stores this nucleotide
sequence.

Owing to the automation of DNA sequencing, the genomes of many organisms have
been sequenced. These include plant chloroplasts and animal mitochondria, large
number of bacteria, many of the yeasts, anematode worm. Drosophila, the model plant
Arabidopsis, the mouse and human. Researchers have also deduced the complete DNA
sequence of a variety of human pathogens.

THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT

The human genome project is massive effort originally founded by the U.S. govern-
ment and now increasingly by U.S. pharmaceutical companies to map the human
chromosomes. Many non-profit and for profit biochemical laboratories around the
world are now involved in the project which has two primary goals.

Animation 23.3: Human Genome Project

Source & Credit: CRDD

@)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

The first goal is to construct a genetic map of the human genome. The aim is to show
the sequence of genes along the length of each type of chromosome, such as de-
picted for the X chromosome in Fig 23.9. When the DNA sequence of human chro-
mosome no. 22, one of the smallest human chromosomes, was completed in 19.99,
it became possible for the first time to see exactly how genes are arranged along an
entire vertebrate chromosome. With the publication of the entire human genome in
2001, the genetic landscape of all human chromosomes suddenly came into sharp
focus. The sheer quantity of information provided by the human genome project is
unprecedented in biology. The human genome is 25 times larger than any other ge-
nome sequenced so far.

| ichthyosis, X linked
, eee hypophosphatemia
ocular albinism
Duchenne muscular dystrophy

————— retinitis pigmentosa

Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
| ee hemophilia B
| fragile X syndrome

hemophilia A
color blindness (several forms)
spastic paraplegia, X linked

Fig 23.9 Genetic map of X chromosome

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

The map for each chromosome is presently incomplete, andin many instances scientists
rely on the placement of RFLPs. These sites eventually allow scientist to pinpoint disease
causing genes because a particular RFLP and a defective gene are often inherited
together. For example it is known that persons with Huntington disease have a unique
site where a restriction enzyme cuts DNA. The test for Huntington disease relies on this
difference from the normal.

The second goal is to construct a base sequence map. There are three billion base
pairs in the human genome and it is estimated it cohld take an encyclopaedia of 200
volumes, each with 1000 pages, to list all of these. Yet this goal has been reached and
all the chromosomes have been sequenced.

BIOTECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS

Today bacteria, plants and animals are genetically engineered to produce biotechnology
products. Organisms that have a foreign gene inserted into them are called transgenic
organisms.

Transgenic Bacteria

Recombinant DNA technology is used to produce bacteria that reproduce in large
vats called bioreactors. If the foreign gene is replicated and actively expressed, a
large amount of protein product can be obtained. Biotechnology products produced
by bacteria, such as insulin, human growth hormone, tissue plasminogen activator,
haemophilia factor Vm, and hepatitis B vaccine are now in the market.

Transgenic bacteria have been produced to promote health of plants for example,
bacteria that normally live on plants and encourage the formation of ice crystals have
been changed from frost - plus to frost - minus bacteria. Also, a bacterium that normally
colonizes the roots of com plants has now been endowed with genes (from another
bacterium) that code for an insect toxin. The toxin protects the roots from insects.
Bacteria can be selected for their ability to degrade a particular substance and then
this ability can be enhanced by genetic engineering. For instance, naturally occurring
bacteria may be engineered to do an even better job of cleaning up beaches after oil

Spills.

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Industry has found that bacteria can be used as biofilters to prevent airborne chemical
pollutants from being vented into the air. They can also remove sulfur from coal before
itis burned and help to clean up toxic waste dumps. One such strain was given genes
that allowed it to clean up levels of toxins that would have killed other strains. Further,
these bacteria were given “suicide” genes that caused them to self-destruct when the
job had been accomplished.

Organicchemicals are often synthesized by having catalysts acton precursor molecules
or by using bacteria to carry out the synthesis. Today, it is possible to go one step further
and to manipulate the genes that code for these enzymes. For instance, biochemists
discovered a strain of bacteria that is specially good at producing phenylalanine; an
organic chemical needed to make aspartame, the dipeptide sweetener better known
as Nutrasweet. They isolated, altered and formed a vector for the appropriate genes
so that various bacteria could be genetically engineered to produce pucnylaianine.
Many major mining companies already use bacteria to obtain various metals. Genetic
engineering may enhance the ability of bacteria to extract copper, uranium and gold
from low grade sources. Some mining companies are testing genetically engineered
organisms that have improved bioleaching capabilities.

Animation 23.4: Transgenic Bectria
ource & Credit: 33rd Square


23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Transgenic Plants

Techniques have been developed to introduce foreign genes into immature plant
embryos, or into plant cells that have had the cell wall removed and are called
protoplasts. It is possible to treat protoplasts with an electric current while they are
suspended ina liquid containing foreign DNA. The electric current makes tiny, selfscaling
holes in the plasma membrane through which genetic material can enter. Then a
protoplast will develop into a complete plant. Foreign genes transferred to cotton, com
and potato strains have made these plants resistant to pests because their cells now
produce an insect'toxin. Similarly, soybeans have been made resistant to a common
herbicide. Some corn and cotton plants are both pest and herbicide resistant. In 1999
these transgenic crops were planted on more than 70 million acres worldwide and the
acreage is expected to triple in about five years. Improvements still to come for are
increased protein or starch content and modified oil or amino acid composition.


23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Agribusiness companies also are in the process of developing transgenic versions
of wheat and rice in addition to com. This is considered an absolute necessity if the
2020 global demand for rice, wheat and com is to be met. World grain harvests have
continued to rise since the 1960s when special high-yield hybrid plants were developed
during the so called green revolution. But the per capita production has now flattened
out because of continued population growth. The hope is that genetic engineering will
allow fanners to surpass the yield barrier. Perhaps, the stomata, the pore-like openings
in the leaves, could be altered to boost carbon dioxide intake or cut down water loss.

Another possible goal is to increase the efficiency of the enzyme Rubisco which captures
C02 in most plants. A team of Japanese scientists are attempting to introduce the C4
cycle into the rice. Plants that utilize the C4 cycle avoid the inefficiency of carboxylase
by using a different means of capturing C02. Unlike the single gene transfers that have
been done so far, these modifications would require a thorough re-engineering of
plant cells. Single gene transfers will cause plants to produce various products. A weed
called mouse-eared cress has been engineered to produce a biodegradable plastic
(polyhydroxy-butyrate) in cell granules.

Plants are being engineered to produce human hormones, clotting factors, and
antibodies in their seeds. One type of antibody made by com can deliver radio
isotopes to tumor cells, and another made by soybeans can be used as treatment for
genital herpes. Plant-made antibodies are inexpensive and there is little worry about
contamination with pathogens that could infect people. Clinical trials have begun.

Transgenic Animals

Techniques have been developed to insert genes into the eggs of animals. It is possible
to micro eggs by hand, but another method uses vortex mixing. The eggs and silicon -
carbide needles, and the needles make DNA can enter. When these eggs are fertilized,
the resulting offspring are transgenic animals. Using this technique many types of animal
eggs have taken up the gene for bovine growth hormone. The procedure has been
used to produce larger fishes’, cows, pigs, rabbits and sheep. Genetically engineered
fishes are now being kept in ponds that offer no escape to the wild because there is
much concern that they will upset or destroy natural ecosystems.

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

WAVY

Sa P HT
humengene, yy egg donor

*:
ey egg
Microinjection of hummen gene

(a) This goat is genetically engineered to produce

Developmentwith a host goat
antithrobin III, which is secreted in her milk '

_—

"ee Transgenic goat

(b) The procedure to produce a

transgenic animal. Milk from transgenic goat |

2n nuclei 9) 9) 9) be Ya egg donor

adult cells from
transgenic goat 5

DO bs: ) enucleated eggs
microinjection of 2n nuclei
(c) The procedure to clone a development within host goats
transgenic animal A 5 ny
cloned transgenic goats

c. Making clones of a
transdenic animal milk from cloned goats

Gene pharming, the’ use of transgenic farm animals to produce pharmaceuticals is
being pursued by a number of firms. Genes that code for therapeutic, and diagnostic
proteins are incorporated into the animal’s DNA, and the proteins appear in the animal’s
milk. There are plans to produce drugs for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, cancer, blood
diseases and other disorders. Antithrombin Ill, for preventing blood clot during surgery,
is currently being produced by a herd of goats, and clinical trials have begun. Figure
23.10 out lines the procedure of producing transgenic mammals. DNA containing the
gene of interest is injected into donor eggs. Following in vitro fertilization, the zygotes
are placed in host females where they develop. After female offspring mature, the

product is secreted in the milk. The scientists of United States Department

@)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

of Agriculture have been able to genetically engineer mice to produce human growth
hormone in their urine instead of in milk. They expect to be able to use the same
technique on larger animals. Urine is a preferable vehicle for a biotechnology product
than milk because all animals in a herd urinate - only females produce milk; animals
Start to urinate at birth - females don’t produce milk until maturity; and its easier to
extract proteins from urine than from milk.

Cloning of Transgenic Animals

Imagine that an animal has been genetically engineered to produce a biotechnology
product. What would be the best possible method of getting identical copies of the
animals? Asexual reproduction through cloning the animal would be the preferred
procedure to use. Cloning is a form of asexual reproduction because it requires only
the genes of that one animal. For many years it was believed that adult vertebrate
animals could not be cloned. Although each cell contains a copy of all the genes certain
genes are turned off in mature specialized cells. Different genes are expressed in
muscle cells, which contract, compared to nerve cells, which conduct nerve impulses
and to glandular cells, which secrete. Cloning of an adult vertebrate requires that all
genes of an adult cells be turned on again if development is to proceed normally. It had
long been thought this would be impossible. In 1997, scientists at the Roslin Institute
in Scotland announced that they achieved this feat and had produced a cloned sheep
called Dolly.

Since then calves and goats have been cloned. Figure 23.10 shows that after
enucleated eggs have been injected with 2n nuclei of adult cells, they can be
coaxed to begin development. The offspring have the genotype and phenotype
of the adult that donated the nuclei; therefore, the adult has been cloned. In the
procedure that produced cloned mice, the 2n nuclei were taken from cumulus cells.

Cumulus cells are those that cling to an egg after ovulation occurs. A specially prepared
chemical bath was used to stimulate the eggs to divide and begin development. Now
that scientists have a method to clone mammals, this procedure will undoubtedly
be used routinely. In the United States, a presidential order prohibits the cloning of
humans. But certain other countries are experimenting with the possibility.

@)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
GENE THERAPY

Gene therapy is the insertion of genetic material into human cells for the treatment
of a disorder. It includes procedures that give a patient healthy genes to make up for
faulty genes and also includes the use of genes to treat various other human illnesses
such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases.

Animation 23.6: Gene Therapy

ource & Credit: Ethris

There are two main methods used for gene therapy Ex-vivo and in vivo. Ex- vivo
gene therapy is shown in Fig. 23.11. in which children in the severe combined
immunodeficiency syndrome (SCID) is treated. These children lack an enzyme
adenosine deaminase (ADA) that is involved in the maturation of T and B cells and,
therefore, they are subjected to life threatening infections. Bone marrow stem cells
are removed from the blood and infected with a retrovirus (RNA virus) that carries a
normal gene for the enzyme then the cells are returned to the patient. Bone marrow
stem cells are preferred for this procedure, because they divide to produce more cells
with same genes. Patients who have undergone this procedure do have a significant
improvement in their immune function that is associated with a sustained rise in the
level of ADA enzyme activity in the blood

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Among the many gene therapy trials, one is for the treatment of familial
hypercholesterolemia a condition that develops when liver cells lack a receptor for
removing cholesterol from the blood. The high levels of blood cholesterol make the
patient subject to fatal heart attacks at a young age. In a newly developed procedure, a
Small portion of the liver is surgically excised and infected with a retrovirus containing
anormal gene for the receptor. Several patients have experienced a lowering of serum
cholesterol levels following this procedure.

Return genetically

Recombinant engineered cell

I to patient
into genome transcription

recombinant,
DNA |

recombinant .
RNA “

retrovirus

Use retroviruses rg
to effect stem cell

with normal gene

Remove stem cell

Fig 23.11 Ex vivo gene therapy in human

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Cystic fibrosis patients lack a gene that codes for trans-membrane carrier of the
chloride ion. Patients often die due to numerous infections of the respiratory tract.
And in vivo method of treatment is being tried. Liposomes-microscopic vesicles that
Spontaneously form when lipoproteins are put into a solution, have been coated with
the gene needed to cure cystic fibrosis. Then the solution is sprayed into patient's
nostrils. Due to limited gene transfer, this methodology has not as yet been successful.

Gene therapy is also being done to cancer patients, which makes them more tolerant
of chemotherapy. In clinical trials researchers have given genes to cancer patient
that either make healthy cells more tolerant of chemotherapy or make tumors more
vulnerable to it. Once the bone marrow stem cells were protected it was possible to
increase the level of chemotherapy to kill the cancer cells.

During coronary artery angioplasty, a balloon catheter is sometimes used to open
up a closed artery. Unfortunately, the artery has a tendency to close up once again.
But investigators have come up with a new procedure. The balloon is coated with a
plasmid that contains a gene for vascular endothelial growth factor. The expression of
the gene, which promotes the proliferation of blood vessels to bypass the obstructed
area, has been observed in at least one patient.

Perhaps it will be possible to used in vivo therapy to cure hemophilia, diabetes.
Parkinson disease, or AIDS. To treat hemophilia, patients could get regular doses of cells
that contain normal clotting-factor genes or such cells could be placed in organoids,
artificial organs that can be implanted in the abdominal cavity. To cure Parkinson’s
disease, dopamine-producing cells could be grafted directly into the brain.

TISSUE CULTURE

Tissue culture is the growth of a tissue in an artificial liquid culture medium. German
botanist Gottlieb Haberlandt said in 1902 that plant cells are totipotent - each cell has
the full genetic potential of the organism - and, therefore, a single cell could become
a complete plant. But it wasn’t until 1958 that Cornell botanist F.C. Steward grew a
complete carrot plant from a tiny piece of phloem. He provided the cells with sugars,
minerals and vitamins, but he also added coconut milk. (Later it was discovered that
coconut milk contains the plant hormone cytokinin). When the cultured cells began
dividing, they produced a callus, an undifferentiated group of cells.

@5)

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Then the callus differentiated into shoot and roots and developed into a complete
plant.
Tissue culture techniques have by now led to micropropagation, a commercial method
of producing thousands, even millions of identical seedlings in a limited amount of
space. One favourite method to accomplish micro propagation is by meristem culture.
If the correct proportions of auxins and cytokinin are added to a liquid medium, many
new shoots will develop from a single shoot tip. When these are removed more shoots
form. Since the shoots are genetically identical the adult plants that develop from them
are called clonal plants, all having the same traits. Another advantage of meristem
culture is that meristem, unlike other portions of a plant, is virus free, therefore the
plants produced are also virus free (The presence of plant viruses weakens plants and
makes them less productive).

Because plants are totipotent, it should be possible to grow an entire plant from
a single cell. This, too has been done. Enzymes are used to digest the cell walls of a
Small piece of tissue, usually mesophyll tissue, from a leaf, and the result is naked
cells without walls, called protoplasts. The protoplasts regenerate a new cell wall
and begin to divide. These clumps of cells can be manipulated to produce somatic
embiyos. Somatic embryos that are encapsulated in a protective hydrated gel (and
sometimes called artificial seeds) can be shipped everywhere. It is possible to produce
millions of somatic embryos at once in large tanks called bioreactors. This is done for
certain vegetables like tomato, celery, asparagus and for ornamental plants like lilies,
begonias and African violets. A mature plant develops from each somatic embryo.
Plants generated from the somatic embryo vary somewhat because of mutations that
arise; dunng the production process. These so called somaclonal variations are another
way to produce new plants with desired traits.
Anther culture is a technique in which mature anthers are cultured in a medium
containing vitamins and growth regulators. The haploid tube cells with in the pollen
grains divide, producing proembryos consisting of as many as 20 to 40 cells. Finally the
pollen grains rupture releasing haploid embryos. The experimenter can now generatea
haploid plant, or chemical agent can be added that encourages chromosomal doubling.
After chromosomal doubling the resulting plants are diploid but homozygous for all
their alleles. Anther culture is a direct way to produce plants that express recessive
alleles. If the recessive alleles govern desirable traits, the plants have these traits.

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

The culturing of plant tissues has led to a technique called cell suspension culture.
Rapidly growing cultures are cut into small pieces and shaken in’a liquid nutrient medium
so that single cells or small clumps of cells break off and form a suspension. These
cells will produce the same chemicals as the entire plant. For example cell suspension
cultures of Cinchona ledgeriana produce quinine and those of Digitalis lanata produce
digitoxin. Scientists envision that it will be possible to maintain cell Suspension cultures
in bioreactors for the purpose of producing chemicals used in the production of drugs,
cosmetics and agricultural chemicals. If so, it will no longer be necessary to farm plants
for the purpose of acquiring the chemicals they produce.

Genetic Engineering of Plants

Traditionally, hybridization, the crossing of different varieties of plants or even species,
was used to produce plants with desirable traits. Hybridization, followed by vegetative
propagation of the mature plants, generated a large number of identical plants with
these traits. Today it is possible to directly alter the genes of organisms. Transgenic
plants carry a foreign gene that has been introduced into their cells so that they have
new and different traits.

Since a whole plant will grow from a protoplast, it is necessary only to place the foreign
gene into a living- protoplast. A foreign gene isolated from any type of organism is
placed in the tissue culture medium.

High-voltage electric pulses can then be used to create pores in the plasma membrane
so that the DNA enters. In one of the first procedures carried out, a gene for the
production of the firefly enzyme luciferase was inserted into tobacco protoplast and
the adult plants glowed when sprayed with the substrate luciferin (Fig. 23.12).

@)

Fig 23.12 Tabacoo plant containing Luciferase gene glows when sprayed with luciferin

Unfortunately, the regeneration of cereal grains from protoplasts has been difficult.
Com and wheat protoplasts produce infertile plants. As a result, other methods are
used to introduce DNA into plant cells with intact cell wall. In one technique, foreign
DNA is inserted into the plasmid of the bacterium Agrobacterium, which normally infects
the plant cells. A plasmid can be used to produce’ recombinant DNA. Recombinant
DNA contains genes from different sources, namely those of plasmids and the foreign
genes of interest. When the bacterium infects the plant the recombinant plasmid is
introduced into the plant cells (Fig.23.12). In 1987, John C Sanford and Theodore M.
Klein of Cornell University developed another method of introducing DNA into a plant
tissue culture callus.

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

They constructed a device, called the particle gun, that bombards a callus with DNA
coated microscopic metal particles. Then genetically altered somatic embryos develop
into genetically adult plants. Many plants including com and wheat varieties have been
genetically engineered by this method.

Agricultural Plants with Improved Traits

Cotton, com, potato and soybean plants have been engineered to be resistant to either
insect predation or herbicides that are judged to be environmentally safe. Some com
and cotton plants have been produced that are both insect and herbicide resistant.
In 1999, transgenic crops were planted on more that 70 million acres world wide and
the acreage is expected to triple in about five years. If crops are resistant to a broad-
spectrum herbicide and weeds are not then the herbicide can be used to kill the weeds.
When herbicide resistant plants were planted weeds were easily controlled, less tillage
was needed and soil erosion was minimized.

One aim of genetic engineering is to produce crops that have the improved agricultural
or food quality traits such as those listed in the table below:

Wheat, rice, sugar beets, canola
Drought tolerant

Improved Food QualityTraits |
Com, soybean


23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Production of salt tolerant plants had been a dream of genetic engineer. Recently
salt - tolerant Arabidopsis has been produced. For this the scientists first identified
a gene coding for a channel protein that transports Na+ along with H+ across a
vacuole membrane. Isolating Na+ in a vacuole prevents it from interfering with plant
metabolism. Then, the scientists cloned the gene and used it to genetically engineer
plants that overproduce the channel protein. The modified plants thrived when
watered with a salty solution. Irrigation, even into fresh water, inevitably leads to a
salinization of soil that reduces crop yields. Today, crop production is limited by effects
of salinization at about 50% of irrigated levels. The next step to solve this problem is
to produce salt - tolerant crops. It is believed that the production not only of salt - but
also drought and cold tolerant crops will reduce the need for added farm acreage by
increasing agricultural yields that will provide enough food for a world population
that is expected to nearly double by 2050.

Some progress has also been made to increase the food quality of crops. Soybeans
have been developed that mainly produce the monounsaturated fatty acid, oleic acid,
a change that may improve human health. These altered plants also produce vernolic
acid and ricinoleic acid, derivatives of oleic acid that can be used as hardenes in paints
and plastics. The necessary genes were derived from Vemonia and castor bean seeds
and were transferred into the soybean genomes.

Genetic Engineering is also expected to increase productivity. To that end, stomata
might be altered to boost carbon dioxide intake or cut down water loss. The efficiency
of the enzyme RuBP carboxylase which captures C02 in plants could be improved. A
team of Japanese scientists is working on introduc ing the C4 photosynthetic cycle into
rice. Unlike C3 plants, C4 plants do well in hot dry weather. These modifications would
require a more complete engineering of plant cells than the single gene transfers’ that
have been done so far.

23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Production of Products

Single gene transfers have allowed plants to produce various products such as human
hormones, clotting factors and antibodies. One type of antibody made by com can
deliver radioisotopes to tumor cells and another made by soybeans can be used as
treatment for genital herpes clinical triats have begun.

Recently, a group of scientists from Biosource Technologies located in Vacaville,
California reported that they have been able to use the tobacco mosaic virus as a
vector to introduce a human gene into adult tobacco plants in the field. Note that
this technology by passes the need for tissue culture completely. Tens of grams of
a-galactosidase, an enzyme that can be used to treat a human lysosome storage
disease, were harvested per acre of tobacco plants. And it only took thirty days to
get tobacco plants to produce antigens to treat non-Hodgkin's lymphoma after being
sprayed with a genetically engineered vims.

EXERCISE

Q.1. Fill in the blanks.


23.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab

Q.3. Short questions.

1. How and why transgenic animals that secrete a product are often cloned?

2. Explain two primary goals of Human Genome Project. What are possible benefits of
the project?

3. Explain and give examples of ex vivo and in vivo gene therapies in humans?

Q.4. Extensive questions.

1. What is the methodology for producing recombinant DNA to be used in gene cloning?

2. What is a genomic library, how would you locate a gene“of.interest in the library?

3. What is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), amfftow is it carried out to produce
multiple copies of a DNA segment?

4, What is DNA finger printing, a process that utilizes the entire genome?

5. For what purpose have bacteria, plants and animals been genetically altered?-

CHAPTER

24

Evolution

Animation 24: Evolution

ource & Credit: Wikispaces

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Questions of origins of earth and life on it have been on the minds of humans since
prehistoric times. Many of us are also concerned with questions of origin: How old is
the planet earth? How long has life been on earth? How did life arise on earth? How did
a certain animal species come into existence? Answers for these questions come from
scientific inquiry. In this chapter we will study some aspects of organic evolution.
Evolution refers to the processes that have transformed life on earth from its earliest
forms to the vast diversity that we observe today. Evolutionary change is based mainly on
the interactions between populations of organisms and their environments. Whenever
we Say or hear the word evolution, name of Darwin comes in our mind immediately. In
fact, he was the first person who argued from evidence that species were not specially
created in their present forms, rather they had evolved from ancestral species. He also
proposed a mechanism for evolution, which he termed Natural Selection.

CONCEPT OF EVOLUTION VS SPECIAL CREATION

In a bid to explain the cause of diversity of life and interrelationship among living
organisms, two schools of thought emerged in the earlier 19th century. Creationists
believed in the Theory of Special Creation, whereas evolutionists believed in the Theory
of Natural Selection. According to the theory of special creation, all living things came
into existence in their present forms especially and specifically created by Nature.
Among the scientists who believed in divine creation was Carolus Linnaeus (1 707-1778).

Animation 24.1: Evolution

Source & Credit: Wifflegif

@)

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
Linnaeus 1707-1778 Sought and found order in the
diversity of life. He introduced
binomial nomenclature for
naming species.
1744-1829 Published his theory of
evolution.

Malthus 1766-1834 Published Essay on_ the
“Principle of Population”.

Cuvier 1769-1832 Contributed much to _ the
science of Palaeontology and
explained Earth’s history by
catastrophism.

Lyell 1797-1875 Published Principles of
Geology.

Darwin 1809-1882 . Voyage of the Beagle
. Began his notebooks on the
origin of species.
. Wrote his essay on the
origin of species.

Mendel 1822-1884 Published papers on
inheritance.

1823-1913 Sent his theory to Darwin.

he idea that organisms might evolve through time, with one type of organism giving
rise to another type of organism, is an ancient one, existing from the days of Aristotle.
Aristotle recognized that organisms ranged from relatively simple to very complex
Structures. However, the present day concept of evolution is based on a known history
(Table 24.1).

Lamarck

Let us now discuss some details of the work done by these scientists. As you know,
Carolus Linnaeus in the eighteenth century classified organisms. He grouped similar
Species in the same genus and similar genera in one family. But as a natural theologian,
he believed that species were permanent creations. A century later, the taxonomic
system of Linnaeus became a focal point in Darwin’s arguments for evolution.


24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

EVOLUTION FROM PROKARYOTES TO EUKARYOTES

One of the speculations trying to explain the origin of life is that it may have begun
deep in the oceans, in underwater hot springs called hydrothermal vents. These vents
could have supplied the energy and raw materials (for the origin and survival of early
life forms. A group of bacteria, called archaeobactiria-that tolerate temperatures up
to 120°C and seem to have undergone less evolutionary ihange than any other living
species supports this vent hypothesis.

The nutrients produced in the primitive environment would have limited early life., If life
were to continue, another source of nutrients was needed. Photosynthesis, probably
freed living organisms from a dwindling supply of nutrients. The first photosynthetic
organisms probably used hydrogen sulfide as a source of hydrogen for reducing
carbon dioxide to sugars. Later, water served this same purpose, and oxygen liberated
by photosynthetic reactions began to accumulate in the atmosphere. Earth and its
atmosphere slowly began to change.

Ozone in the upper atmosphere began to filter ultraviolet radiation from the sun, the
reducing atmosphere slowly became an oxidizing atmosphere, and at least some living
organisms began to utilize oxygen. About 420 million years ago, enough protective
ozone had built up to make life on land possible. Ironically, the change from a
reducing atmosphere to an oxidizing atmosphere also meant that life could no longer
arise abiotically .The first cells were most likely very simple prokaryotic forms. The
prokaryotes may have arisen more than 3.5 billion years ago. Eukaryotes are thought to
have first appeared about 1.5 billion years ago. The eukaryotic cell might have evolved
when a large anaerobic (living without oxygen) amoeboid prokaryote ingested small
aerobic (living with oxygen) bacteria and stabilized them instead of digesting them.
This idea is known as the endosymbiont hypothesis (Fig.24.la) and was first proposed
by Lynn Margulis. According to this hypothesis, the aerobic bacteria developed into
mitochondria, which are the sites of aerobic respiration and most energy conversion
in eukaryotic cells. The possession of these mitochondria like endosymbionts brought
the advantage of aerobic respiration to the host.

©

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Flagella (whiplike structures) may have arisen through the ingestion of prokaryotes
Similar to spiral-shaped bacteria called spirochetes. Ingestion of prokaryotes that
resembled present-day cyanobacteria could haveledtothe endosymbioticdevelopment
of chloroplasts in plants.

Another hypothesis for the evolution of eukaryotic cells proposes that the prokaryotic
cell membrane invaginated (folded inward) to enclose copies of its genetic material
(Fig. 24.1b). This invagination resulted in the formation of several double membrane-
bound entities (organelles) in a single cell. These entities could then have evolved into
the eukaryotic mitochondrion, nucleus, chloroplast etc.

Whatever the exact mechanism for the evolution of the eukaryotic cell might be, the
formation of the eukaryotic cell led to a dramatic increase in the complexity and diversity
of life-forms on the earth. At first, these newly formed eukaryotic cells existed only by
themselves. Later, however, some probably evolved into multicellular organisms in
which various cells became specialized into tissues, which, in turn, formed organs for
many different functions. These multicellular forms then adapted themselves to life in
a great variety of environments.

Animation 24.2: Evolution from Prokaryots to Euokaryot
Source & Credit:

©)

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

(1)
Aerobie bacteria 2) Prokaryotic
“3, amoeboid
s 7 \, host (2)
“| amoeboid form
Spirochetes \ containing ?
\\. mitochondria

ines ewentataeen) \ ameboflagellate

Antotrophic eukaryotic
cell (obtains energy
from the sun)

(a)

Figure 24.1: Two hypothesies on the evolution of the eukaryotic cell. (a) Endosymbiont hypothesis, (b) Membrane invagination
hypothesis. (1) A prokaryotic cell (2) Duplicates its genetic material (genome) (3) The plasma membrane then invaginates to form
double membrane-bound organelles, and the individual genomes separate from each other (4) The nuclear genome eventually
enlarges, while the other organelle genomes lose many of their genes, resulting in a eukaryotic cell.

INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERISTICS

Toward the end of the eighteenth century, several naturalists suggested that life had
evolved along with the evolution of earth. But only one of Darwin’s predecessors
developed a comprehensive model that attempted to explain how life evolves. Jean
Baptiste Lamarck (1744-1829) published his theory of evolution in 1809, the year
Darwin was bom. Lamarck was in-charge of invertebrate collection at the Natural
History Museum in Paris. He presented a mechanism to explain how specific
adaptations evolve. Lamarck argued that those parts of the body used extensively
to cope with the environment become larger and stronger, while those that are not

used deteriorate. ()

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Among the examples Lamarck cited were the blacksmith developing a bigger bicep
in the arm that works the hammer and giraffe stretching its neck to new lengths in
pursuit of leaves to eat. The second idea Lamarck adopted, was called the inheritance
of acquired characteristics. In this concept of heredity, the modifications an organism
acquires during its lifetime can be passed along to its offspring’e.g. the long neck of
the giraffe, Lamarck reasoned, evolved gradually as the cumulative product of a great
many generations of ancestors stretching higher and higher. However, now we know
that acquired characteristics cannot be inherited.

Charles Darwin

Charles Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, in Western England, in 1809. He joined ' the
expedition on Beagle to South American coastline. He observed and collected thousands
of specimens of diverse fauna and flora of South America. He noticed that the fauna
and flora of the different regions of the continent had a definite South American stamp,
very distinct from the life forms of Europe. Furthermore, the South American fossils
that Darwin found, though clearly different from modem species, were distinctly South
American in their resemblance to the living plants and animals of that continent.

A particularly puzzling case of geographical distribution was the fauna of the Galapagos
islands. Most of the animal species on the Galapagos live nowhere else in the world,
although they resemble species living on the South American mainland. It was as
though the islands were colonized by plants and animals that strayed from the South
American mainland and then diversified on the different islands. Among the birds
Darwin collected on the Galapagos were 13 types of finches that, although quite similar,
seemed to be different species. Some were unique to individual islands, while other
Species were distributed on two or more islands that were close together.

After returning to Great Britain in 1836, Darwin perceived the origin of new species
and adaptations as closely related processes. A new species would arise from an
ancestral form by the gradual accumulation of adaptations to different environments,
separated from original habitat by geographical barriers. Over many generations, the
two populations could become dissimilar enough to be designated as separate species.
This is apparently what happened to the Galapagos finches.

@

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

By the early 1840s, Darwin had worked out the major features of his theory of natural
Selection as the mechanism of evolution. In 1844, Darwin wrote a long essay on the
origin of species and natural selection.

But before it could be published Alfred Wallace, a young naturalist working in the East
Indies developed a theory of natural selection essentially identical to Darwin's. Wallace’s
paper, along with extracts from Darwin’s unpublished 1844 essay, were presented to
the Linnaean Society of London on July 1, 1858. Darwin quickly finished The Origin of
Species and published it the next year. In this book Darwin developed two main points:

1. Descent with Modification :

Darwin believed in perceived unity in life, with all organisms related through descent
from some common ancestor that lived in the remote past. In the Darwinian view, the
history of life is like a tree, with multiple branching and rebranching from a common
trunk all the way to the tips of the living twigs, symbolic of the current diversity of
organisms. At each fork of the evolutionary tree is an ancestor common to all lines of
evolution branching from that fork.

2. Natural Selection and Adaptation :

Darwin suggested that populations of individual species become better adapted to

their local environments through natural selection. Darwin's theory of natural selection

was based on the following observations.

1. Production of more individuals than the environment can support, leads to a struggle
for existence among individuals of a population, with only a fraction of offspring
surviving each generation.

2. Survival in the struggle for existence is not random,, but depends in part on the
hereditary constitution of the surviving individuals. Those individuals whose inherited
characteristics fit them best to their environment are likely to leave more offspring
than the less fit individuals.

3. This unequal ability of individuals to survive and reproduce will lead to a gradual
change in a population, with favourable characteristics accumulating over the
generations thus leading to the evolution of a new species.

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Neo-Darwinism - The modern evolutionary synthesis

The Origin of Species convinced most biologists that species are products of evolution.
An important turning point for evolutionary theory was the birth of population genetics,
which emphasizes the extensive genetic variation within populations and recognizes
the importance of quantitative characters. With progress in population genetics in the
1930s, Mendelism and Darwinism were reconciled, and the genetic basis of variation
and natural selection was worked out. Thus, a comprehensive theory of evolution that
became known as the modern synthesis or Neo-Darwinism was developed in the
early 1940s. It is called a synthesis because it integrated discoveries and idea« from
many different fields, including paleontology, taxonomy, biogeography, of course,
population genetics.

Evidences of Evolution

Evolution leaves observable signs. Darwin’s theory of evolution was mainly based on
the evidence from the geographical distribution of species and from the fossil record.
However, there have been many evidences as biology progressed. New discoveries,
continue to validate the evolutionary view of life. Let us discuss now some of the
evidences.

Biogeography : It was the geographical distribution of species— biogeography— that
first suggested the idea of evolution to Darwin. Islands have many species of plants
and animals that are endemic but closely related to species of the nearest mainland
or neighboring island. Consider armadillos, the armored mammals that live only in
America. The evolutionary view of biogeography predicts that contemporary armadillos
are modified descendants of earlier species that occupied these continents, and the
fossil record confirms that such ancestors existed.

@)

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

The Fossil Record : The succession of fossil forms is a strong evidence in favour of
evolution. It provides a visual record in a complete series showing the evolution of
an organism. For instance, evidence from biochemistry, molecular biology, and cell
biology places prokaryotes as the ancestors of all life, and predicts that bacteria should
precede all eukaryotic life in the fossil record. Indeed, the oldest known fossils are
prokaryotes.

Another example is the chronological appearance of the different classes of vertebrate
animals in the fossil record. Fossil fishes, the earliest vertebrates, with amphibians
next, followed by reptiles, then mammals and birds. This sequence is consistent with
the history of vertebrate descent. The evolution of horse provides an example of such
a history.

Comparative Anatomy : Anatomical similarities between species grouped in the
Same taxonomic category bring another support to the theory of the Descent with
modification. For example, the same skeletal elements make up the forelimbs of
human, cats, whales, bats, and all other mammals, although these appendages have
very different functions.

The basic similarity of these forelimbs is the consequence of mammals from a common
ancestor. The amis, wings, flippers, and forelegs of different mammals are variations
on a common anatomical theme that has been modified for divergent functions.
Similarity in characteristics resulting from common ancestry is Known as homology,
and such anatomical signs of evolution are called homologous structures. Comparative
anatomy supports that evolution is a remodeling process in which ancestral structures
that functioned in one capacity become modified as they tale on new functions. The
flower parts of a flowering plant are homologous. They are considered to have evolved
from leaves, to form sepals, petals, stamens and carpels

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Homologous organs are functionally different but structurally alike e.g. Fore limbs of man, bat,
horse, whale etc. are example of divergent evolution. Analogous organs are functionally alike but
structurally different e.g. wings of bat, birds and insects etc. are examples of convergent evolution.

The oldest homologous structures are vestigial organs, rudimentary structures of
marginal, if any, use to the organism. Vestigial organs are historical remnants of
structures that had important functions in ancestors but are no longer essential
presently. For instance, the skeletons of whales and some snakes retain vestiges of the
pelvis and leg bones of walking ancestors, (Fig. 24.2) vermiform appendix in carnivores,
ear muscles in man etc.

Fig. 24.2: The whale retains pelvic and leg bones as useless vestiges

©)

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

ig. 24.3 Homologies among vertebrates are clearly evident early in development, as the photos reveal. Embryo (a) turtle, (b) mouse,
(c) human, (d) chick.

Comparative Embryology : Closely related organisms go through similar stages in their
embryonic development. For example, all vertebrate embryos go through a stage
in which they have gill pouches on the sides of their throats. At embryonic stage of
development, similarities between fishes, frogs, snakes, birds, humans, and all other
vertebrates are much more apparent than differences (Fig.24.3). As development
progresses, the various vertebrates diverge more and more, taking on the distinctive
characteristics of their classes. In fish, for example, the gill pouches develop into gills;
in terrestrial vertebrates, these-embryonic structures become modified for other
functions, such as the eustachian tubes that connect the middle ear with the throat in
humans.

Comparative embryology can often establish homology among structures, such as gill
pouches, that become so altered in later development that their common origin would
not be apparent by comparing their fully developed forms.

@)

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Molecular Biology: Evolutionary relationships among species are reflected in their
DNA and proteins—in their genes and gene products. If two species have genes and
proteins with sequences of monomers that match closely, the sequences must have
been copied from a common ancestor. For example, a common genetic code brings
evidence that all life is related. Molecular biology has thus provided strong evidence in
support of evolution as the basis for the unity and diversity of life. Similarly, taxonomically
remote organisms, such as humans and bacteria, have some proteins in common. For
instance, cytochrome ¢, a respiratory protein is found in all aerobic species.
NATURAL SELECTION AND ARTIFICIAL SELECTION

Natural selection occurs through an interaction between the environment and the
variability inherent in any population. Darwin found evidence in artificial selection, the
breeding of domesticated plants and animals. Humans have modified other species
over many generation by selecting individuals with the desired traits as breeding stock.
The plants and animals we grow for food bear little resemblance to their wild ancestors.
From the changes achieved by artificial selection within a relativ ely short period of
time, Darwig postulated that natural selection operating over vast spans of time could
account for the entire diversity of life. Population is a group of inter-breeding individuals
belonging to a particular species and sharing a common geographic area.

Natural selection can amplify or diminish only those variations that are heritable. It is
noteworthy to say that adaptations that an organism acquires by its own actions are
not heritable. The specifics of natural selection are regional and timely; environmental
factors vary from place to place and from time to time. An adaptation in one situation
may be useless or even detrimental in other circumstances. An example of natural
selection in action is the evolution of antibiotic resistance in bacteria.

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

POPULATION, GENE POOL, ALLELE AND GENOTYPE FREQUENCIES

A population is a localized group of individuals belonging to the same species. For
now, we will define a species as a group of populations that have the potential to
interbreed in nature. Each species has a geographical range within which individuals
are not spread out evenly, but are usually concentrated in several localized populations.
A population may be isolated from others of the same species, exchanging genetic
material only rarely. Such an isolation is particularly common for populations confined
to widely separated islands, unconnected lakes, or mountain ranges separated by
lowlands. Within a population individuals are concentrated in centers and are more
likely to interbreed with members of the same population than with members of other
populations. Therefore, individuals near a population center are, on average, more
closely related to one another than to members of other populations.

The total aggregate of genes in a population at any one time is called the population’s
gene pool. It consists of all alleles at all gene loci in all individuals of the population. For
a diploid species, each locus is represented twice in the genome of an individual, who
may be either homozygous or heterozygous.

Animation 24.3: Gene Pool

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

\ee¢

If all members of a population are
homozygous for the same allele, that
allele is said to be fixed in the gene
pool. More often, there are two or
more alleles for a gene, each having es
relative frequency (proportion) in the

gene pool. Let us consider an example. 0.64 0.32 0.04
Imagine a wildflower population with

two varieties contrasting in flower | al % |
color. An allele for pink flowers, which

we will symbolize by A, is completely 0.64 + 0.16 0.16+ 0.04
dominant over an allele for white a
flowers, symbolized by a. Suppose
these are the only two alleles for this
locus in the population. Our imaginary
population has 500 plants. Twenty
have white flowers because they are
homozygous for the recessive allele;
their genotype is aa. Of the 480 plants
with pink flowers, 320 are homozygous
(AA) and 160 are heterozygous (Aa).
Since these are diploid organisms,
there area total oflOOOcopies of genes
for flower color in the population. The
dominant allele accounts for 800 of
these genes (320x2 = 640 for AA plants, Figure 24.4: The Hardy-Weinberg theorem. The genetic

plus 160x1 = 160 for An individuals). structure of a non evolving population remains constant over

+, the generations. Sexual recombination alone will not alter the
Thus, the frequency of the A allele in relative frequencies of alleles or genotypes, (p = frequency of A;

the gene pool of this population is q= frequency of a)

80%, or 0.8. And since there are only

two allelic forms of the gene, the a allele must have a frequency of 20%, or 0.2. Related
to these allele frequencies are the frequencies of genotypes. In our model wildflower
population, these frequencies are: AA=0.64 (64%) (320 out of 500 plants), Aa=0.32
(160/500), and aa = 0.04 (20/500). (15)


24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Hardy-Weinberg Theorem

The frequencies of genotypes of non evolving populations are described by Hardy-
Weinberg theorem. Hardy-Weinberg theorem is named for the two scientists who
derived the principle independently in 1908. It states that the frequencies of alleles
and genotypes in a population’s gene pool remain constant over the generations
unless acted upon by agents other than sexual recombination. So shuffling of alleles
due to meiosis and random fertilization has no effect on the overall genetic structure
of a population. A general formula, called the Hardy- Weinberg equation is used for
calculating the frequencies of alleles and genotypes in populations at equilibrium.

For a gene locus where only two alleles occur in a population, population geneticists
use the letter p to represent the frequency of one allele and the letter g to represent
the frequency of the other allele. In the imaginary wildflower population, p=0.8 and
<7=0.2. Note that p+q= 1; the combined frequencies of all possible alleles must account
for 100% of the genes for that locus in the population. If there are only two alleles and
we know the frequency of one, the frequency of other can be calculated:

Ifp + q-1, then 1-p = q, or I-q- p

When gametes combine their alleles to form zygotes, the probability of generating
an AA genotype is p2. In the wildflower population, p-0.8, and p7=0.64, the probability
of an A sperm fertilizing an A ovum to produce an AA zygote. The frequency of
individuals homozygous for the other allele (aa) is q’, or 0.2x0.2=0.04 for the wildflower
population. There are two ways in which an Aa genotype can arise, depending on which
parent contributes the dominant allele. Therefore, the frequency of heterozygous
individuals in the population is 2pq (2x0.8x0.2=0.32, in our example). If we have
calculated the frequencies of all possible genotypes correctly, they should add up to 1:
P+ 2pq + Qe 1

Frequency Frequency Frequency

of AA of Aa plus aA ofaa

For our wildflowers,this is 0.64 + 0.32 + 0.04=1*

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

* In fact the Hardy-Weinberg equation is a binomial expansion: (p+q)? or p2+2pq+q?

Factors affecting gene frequency

Many factors can alter gene frequency. Out of these five affect the proportion of

homozygotes and heterozygotes enough to produce significant deviations form the

proportion claimed by Hardy Weinberg principle. They are reflected in the table below.
Table 24.2 Factors for evolutionary change

rarely that mutation alone does not change allele frequency much.
A very potent agent of change, migration locally acts to prevent
evolutionary changes by preventing populations that exchange
members from diverging from one another. Emigration and
immigration of members of a population, cause disturbance in the
gene pool.

It is the change in frequency of alleles at a locus that occurs by

chance. In small populations, such fluctuations may lead to the loss
of particular alleles. This may occur in a small population when a
few individual fail to reproduce and then genes are lost from the
population.
Inbreeding is the most common form; it does not alter allele
frequency, but lessens the proportion of heterozyote individuals.
Individuals with certain genotypes sometimes mate with one another
more commonly than would be expected on a random basis. This
is called non-random mating, causing the frequencies of particular
genotypes to differ greatly from those predicted by the 1 lardy-
Weinberg principle.
Some individuals leave behind more progeny than others, and the
rate at which they do so is affected by their inherited characteristics.
This is called selection. Selection can be artificial selection or natural
selection. In artificial selection, the breeders select for the desired
characters. In natural selection, the environment plays this role, thus
affecting the proportions of gene in a population.


24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

ENDANGERED SPECIES

Extinction has been the fate of most plant and animal species. It is a natural process
that will continue. In recent years, however, the threat to the welfare of wild plants and
animals has increased dramatically—mostly as a result of habitat destruction. Tropical
rain forests, the most threatened areas on the earth, have been reduced to 44% of their
original extent. In certain areas, such as Ecuador, forest coverage has been reduced
by 95%. This decrease in habitat has resulted in- tens of thousands of extinctions.
Accurately estimating the number of extinctions is impossible in areas like rain forests,
where taxonomists have not even described most species. We are losing species -that
we do not know exist and we are losing resources that could lead to new medicines,
foods, and textiles, Other causes of extinction include climate change, pollution, and
invasions from foreign species. Habitats other than rain forest—grasslands,’marshes,
deserts, and coral reefs—are also being seriously threatened.

Animation 24.4: Endangeres Species

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

An endangered species is in imminent danger of extinction throughout its range

(where it lives). A threatened species is likely to become endangered in the near future.

Saving species requires more than preserving a few remnant individuals. It requires a

large diversity of genes within species groups to promote species survival in changing

environments. This genetic diversity requires large populations of plants and animals.

Preservation of endangered species depends on a multifaceted conservation plan that

includes the following components:

1. Aglobal system of national parks to protect large tracts of land and wildlife corridors
that allow movement between natural areas.

2. Protected landscapes and multiple-use areas that allow controlled private activity
but also retain value as a wildlife habitat.

3. Zoos and botanical gardens to save species whose extinction is imminent.

In Pakistan. Cheetah. Tiger. Asian lion. Indian rhino. Cheer pheasant. Crocodile and
Gaviul have been declared extinct. While. Indus dolphin. Blackbuck, Common leopard.
Great Indian bustard. Houbara bustard. White-headed duck and Marbled teal are
among the animal near to extinction.

Deserts, Sub-mountianous tract and Wetlands are habitats in peril. We must protect
them rapidly. Endangered species of plants have been recorded to more than 500.

Animation 24.5: Endangeres Species

Source & Credit: Education Worla


24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Q1_sFill in the blanks.

1. Archaebacteria can tolerate high temperature sup to

2. The first eukaryote appeared about years ago.

3. presented the theory of the origin of species by means of Natural Selection.
4. developed a theory of natural selection essentially identical to Darwin’s.

5. are considered to be the ancestors of all life.

6. Arespiratory protein called is found in all aerobic organisms.

7. Total aggregate of genes in a population at any time is called its

8. Hardy Weinberg theorem describes a population.

9. isa series of changes in the genetic composition of a population over time.
10. Level of classification between species and family is called

11. Hardy Weinbeig equation is binomial expansion of

12. An species is in imminent danger of extinction throughout its range.

13. A is a localized group of individuals belonging to the same species.

14. The first photosynthetic organisms used as source of hydrogen for

reducing carbon dioxide to sugars.
15.

published an essay on The Principle of Population’.

24. Evolution eLearn.Punjab

Q.2 Short questions.

1. What are hydrothermal vents?

2. State Endosymbiont hypothesis.

3. Define population genetics.

4. How does fossil record provide evidence of evolution?

5. Explain the term homology with a suitable example.

6. What are vestigial organs? Give two examples.

7. How are evolutionary relationships reflected in DNA and proteins?

8. State Hardy Weinberg theorem.

9. What is the difference between endangered species and threatened species?
10. Name any five species, declared extinct in Pakistan.

Q.4 Extensive Questions

1.What are the endangered species? What measures could be adapted for their
preservation?

2. State and explain Hardy-Weinberg theorem.

3. Describe evidences of evolution from any five branches of biology.

4, How did evolution proceed from prokaryotes to eukaryotes? Analyze the Darwin’s
theory of natural selection as mechanism of evolution.

CHAPTER

25

ECOSYSTEM

Animation 25: Ecosystem
Source and Credit:

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

INTRODUCTION

The term ecology comes from the Greek words oikos. meaning “the family household”,
and logy, meaning “ the study of”. The term originally was coined by the German
zoologist Ernst Haeckel in 1866. He called it oecologic and defined it as the study of the
relationship of animals (organisms) to their environment.

Environment includes not only the physical but also the biological conditions under
which an organism lives. Relationship includes interactions with the physical world and
with members of other species and the same species.

ECOSYSTEM

The major unit of ecology is the ecosystem. Organisms interact with their environment
within the confines of the ecosystem. The eco part of the word is related to the
environment and the system part means a collection of related parts that function as a
unit. The ecosystem consists of two basic interacting components, the living or biotic,
and the physical or abiotic factors.(Fig.25.1)

Biotic components consist of animals, plants, fungi, micro-organisms etc. and
abiotic components are atmosphere, climate, soil, and water.

The various kinds of organisms that inhabit an ecosystem make up populations.
Population is a group of interbreeding individuals (same species) occurring together
in space and time. Populations of plants and animals in the ecosystem do not function
independently of each other.

Animation 25: Ecosystem
Source and Credit:

@)

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Some populations compete with other populations for resources, such as food, water, or
Space. In some cases, one population is the food resource for another. Two populations
may mutually benefit each other. All populations within an ecosystem are known as a
community and are in one or another manner interconnected to one another.

The ecosystem has many levels. On our level, individual organism, including man, both
responds to and influences the physical environment. At the next level, individuals of
the same species form population, that can be described in terms of number, growth
rate, and age distribution. Further, individuals of these populations interact among
themselves and with individuals of other species and form a community.

Major types of ecosystems, those that occupy broad geographical regions are
called biomes. Each biome consists of a combination of plants and animals in the fully
developed climax community, and is characterized by a uniform life-form of vegetation
such as grass or coniferous trees. Some major terrestrial biomes are forest, grass land,
and desert. Combined the biomes of earth together form the planetary ecosystem.

Other animals Microscope organism

Temperature Gravity
Air presure

Fig. 25.1 Your environment

@)

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Biosphere

Biosphere is a thin layer of earth in which all living organisms exist. Organisms within
the biosphere not only adapt themselves to the environment but also interact to modify
and control chemical and physical conditions of the biosphere. An organism lives in a
habitat.

An organism responds to a variety of environmental factors, and only when all of them
are within the range of tolerance, it can inhabit a location. The actual location of place
where an organism lives is called its habitat.

In 1917, Joseph Grinnell an American ornithologist first proposed the term niche in
ecology. The habitat and niche are closely related. Niche is defined as the ultimate
distributional unit within which a species is restrained by the limitations of its physical
structure and its physiology. Charles Eltan considered the niche, the basic role of an
organism in the community-what it does in and for living community, its relationship to
its food and enemies. In other words, he defined the niche as the species’s occupation.

It refers to a profession or job of an organism. Ecosystems are composed of organisms
with different jobs or ways of life, particularly concerned with feeding, the role of a
particular species within an ecosystem, including all aspects of its interaction with the
living and the non-living environment.

Ecological niche with habitat also specifies how the organism gets its supply of energy
and materials - for example organism's predators, prey and competitors as well as its
behavior and interactions are considered elements of its niche.

©

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

In addition, niche includes all the physical factors of the environment necessary for
survival, such as range of temperature, amount of humidity, the pH of the water and
Soil.

Autecology

Ecology is the study of relationship of living organisms to their environment. When
you are studying a single population’s relationship to its environment it will be called
as autecology. For example, you are studying 50 to 100 plants of soybean in order
to know the effect of water pollution on their growth and yield, you are studying the
single or one population of soybean plant, this study is autecology.

Synecology

Growth responses of individual plants to their environment are a complex factor.
One factor can aggaravate the other factor. These factors interact with one another.
Complexity of environment depends upon the combination of various factors. The
study of the relationship of different communities (grouping of populations) to their
environment is called synecology or community ecology.

When you study only one population, at different places in an environment it will be
autecology. But when you see all the populations at the same time it will be synecology.
In synecology (the study of a community) you have to see the various aspects of
community like the origin, structure and composition of the community. You have to
consider the history of community and also its dynamics because community is not a
fixed entity but different changes are going to occur at different times. While studying
the community we come across three levels of integration : (i) individual (ii) population
(iii) Community.

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

a ee
SE Tes! eign ‘wie: Te oy, As ~~ Denis

fant
gh, =

Fig. 25.2(a) A populati

i=

on of birds Fig. 25.2(b) Acommunity

COMPONENTS OF ECOSYSTEM

As discussed earlier the ecosystem can be divided into two main components.

1. Biotic Components

Biotic components include all living organisms including plants and animals supported
by biosphere. Biosphere is spread out over the surface of plant earth extending about
8-10 kilometers to the upper reaches of atmosphere and also the same distance into
the depths of oceans.

Animation 25.2:Biotic v/s Abiotic Components
Source and Credit:

©)

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

2. Abiotic Components

Abiotic components include all non-living components air, water, and soil. In ecological
term they are called as : (a) atmosphere — (atmo - air, sphere - place) (b) hydrosphere
— (hydro - water, sphere - place) (c) lithosphere — (litho - earth,soil, sphere - place).
Processes in Ecosystem and Interaction between

Biotic and Abiotic Components:

The main processes occurring in an ecosystem include feeding and the circulation
of chemical elements, together with the energy flowing through the ecosystem.

An ecosystem is made up of three main components, the producers, the consumers
and the decomposers. All are concerned with the feeding processes, the circulation of
chemical elements and the flow of energy.

Producers are the autotrophs green photosynthetic plants, which capture and
bring light energy into the ecosystem. They are able to manufacture organic food from
Simpler inorganic substances. They are autotrophic
organisms.

Consumers are all the organisms, primarily
animals, which obtain energy directly or indirectly
from the producers as ready-made organic food.
They are mainly heterotrophic organisms.

Decomposers are mainly the fungi and bacteria,
which obtain their energy from the dead and
decaying plants and animals. They release chemical
elements as ions. The main chemical ions are
nitrates, ammonia, phosphates, potassium and
calcium.

Food Chain

Basically, all animals depend on plants for their food. Eagle may eat blue bird, but blue
bird eats insects like caterpillar and caterpillar feeds on grass or green leaves. This is
an example of a simple food chain.

@

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Food Web

Food web is actually “the combination of many food chains”. Food webs are not
really as simple as described in Fig. 25.3, because most animals eat more than one
type of food at different times as fox does not feed entirely on rabbit but also takes
beetles, rats etc.

All the food chains and food webs begin with a green plant (producer) and may
consist of three to five links or trophic levels (Fig. 25.3).

Tertiary Consumer

secondry
Consumer
Primary p Beetle
Consumer
e
Rabbit
T2
Grass
Producer

Fig 25.3 Food Web and various trophic level

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
In a food web you will find more complex trophic levels or food links. In fig (25.3).
food chain T, is the first trophic producer level, Includes all green plants, grass, and
phytoplankton; T, , second trophic level - primary consumers; T,, third trophic level -
secondary consumers; T, ,fourth trophic level - tertiary consumers.

The variety of pathways in a food web helps to maintain the stability of the
ecosystem. For example, owls prey on rabbits and mice. If a disease reduces the rabbit
population; fewer plants are consumed. The larger plant population produces more
fruits and seeds, which, in turn, support a larger mouse population. The increased
number of mice becomes the major food source for the owls. The rabbit population
gradually increases, and these primary consumers once again become a food source
for the owls. Thus nature maintains a balance.

SUCCESSION

Succession is a squence of changes in the community structure of an ecosystem
over a period of time. Community changes alter the ecosystem in ways that favours
the competitors and species to replace their predecessors in somewhat predictable
manner until a stable, self sustaining climax community is reached. Succession is a
kind of “community relay” in which assemblages of plants and animals replace the
earlier ones in a sequence that is at least somewhat predictable. The precise changes
occurring during succession are as diverse as the environments in which succession
occurs, but certain general stages can be recognized.

Animation 25.3: Succession

Source and Credit:

@)

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

In each case succession is initiated by a few hardy invaders called pioneers and it ends
with a diverse and relatively stable climax community.
Two Major Forms of Succession

Succession on dry land takes two major forms, primary succession and secondary
succession. During primary succession, an ecosystem is forged from bare rock, sand
or clear glacial pool where there was no trace of previous life.

The formation of an ecosystem from scratch is a process often requiring thousands

of years. During secondary succession a new ecosystem develops after an existing
ecosystem is disturbed as in case of forced fire or an abandoned farm field. Secondary
succession happens much more rapidly than primary succession because the previous
community has left its mark in the form of improved soil and seeds. Primary succession
Starting in a pond is called hydrosere and that ona dry soil or habitat is called xerosere.
Plants growing in xeric condition are called xerophytes, which are able to withstand
prolonged periods of water shortage. Succullent plants such as the cacti have water
stored in large parenchyma tissue, others have leaf modification. Xerosere has the
following different stages.
Crustose lichen stage : A crust is any external protective surface and crustose means
crusts on the substratum. Special types of lichens get impregnated in the form of crust.
They can live in extreme conditions. Sometimes, their surface is wet due to rain and
dew- drops. They absorb water during dry season. They are quiescent or dormant,
normally desiccated during dry season.

Foliage lichen stage: In this stage the lichens are just like crumpled leaves attached at
one point. It produces shade to the crustose lichens as a result of which their growth
is reduced or decreased. The area becomes rough , as more and more fissures and
depressions develop. Common examples are, Dermatocarpon, Parmellia, etc. At this
Stage other plants invade called moss stage, because now soil is more porous with
some litter of lichens.

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Moss stage : This is the third stage with mosses like, Polytrichum, Tortula etc. They
compete with lichens for water and penetrate much deeper into the soil as compared
to the lichens, adding more humus to the soil.

Herbaceous (plant) stage : Small seedling of herbaceous plants now establish due to
the more availability of moisture, humus and soil for anchorage.

Shrub stage : Shrubby plants now start growing, dominating and shadowing herbaceous
plants which die to add more humus to the soil.

Climax forests: The soil is improved to an extent that it now allows the growth/
establishment of woody plants. The shade of these plants inhibits the growth of most
plants other than mosses, lichens, a few ferns etc. Woody plants dominate and this
Stage in succession remains essentially the same if nothing changes in the environment
to upset the balance. Because it is a stable stage in succession, the woody forest is
considered to be the climax stage for this region (Fig. 25.4).

Lichen on bare rock Blubell,yarrow Blue bery Jack pine,Black Spruce Climax forest

Fig. 25.4 Primary Succession

©)

25. Ecosystem

eLearn.Punjab

Seral communities (seral stages)

mm oo —D—WIOOG i
Bare ground > Lichenstalgae > Mossestferns — Grasses > Shrubs > Trees

Pioneer community

Predation and its Significance

An animal that preys on other
animals is a predator. A predator is a
consumer. The animal that is caught
and eaten is the prey. The over all
process is called predation.

The sizes of populations of
predator and prey are related
to each other. The size of each
population is determined by the size
of the other. If the number of prey is
large, this leads to an increase in the
number of predators; as predator
feeds upon the prey, the number of
prey begins to fall. The number of
predators also decreases, since they
have smaller food supply. As the
number of predators decreases, the
number of prey begins to increase.
This food relationship of predator -
prey creates a “cycle”.

Examples: cat/mouse, fox/rabbit,
seal/fish, frog/mosquito, hawk/small
birds etc.

Climax community

Shelter,mineral
(— i ~*~
Lichen fungus Lichen algae
a Nutrients and a

oxygen

@)

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Parasitism and its Significance
This is an association between a host and a parasite, which involves providing the
parasite with food, protection and conditions for its survival. The parasite may or may
not harm the host. Diseases in living organisms, which are caused by parasites are
called infestations. Parasites may be ectoparasites, living outside the body of the
host e.g. fungi causing dandruff in hair and endoparasites, living inside the body of
the host e.g. tape worm in intestine of man.

Symbiosis
Itis an association between two organisms, which brings benefit to both the organisms.
Root Nodules: The legume plant , pea and bean, are the hosts to symbiont bacteria,
which inhabit the roots forming root nodules. The bacteria in the root nodules fix
nitrogen in soil from air, converting it into amino acid, which the host uses. In return,
host provides bacteria with food and protection.
Mycorrhiza : Mycorrhiza is an association between the roots of plants growing in acid
soil and certain fungi. The host is pine, beech or heather and it provides the fungus
with an enzyme to digest carbohydrates in leaf litter. In return, the fungus symbiont
passes mineral ions from the soil to the host.

Mutualism:

It is the relationship between two organisms in which both the organisms benefit
from each other. Lichens are an example of mutualism between a fungus and an alga.
The relationship between insects and flowering plants is another example. The insect
gets nectar from the flower; the flowers are able to reproduce because the insects
carry pollen from flower to flower.

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Lichens:

Lichen is a dual organism composed of symbiotic association of an alga living within
a fungus mycelium. The lichens grow on exposed rock surfaces and are important
colonizers of bare ground.

Commensalism

In this type of relationship only one organism benefits from the relationship. The other
is not affected at all. For example, sharks may have small fish called remoras attached
to them. As the shark feeds, the remoras pick up the scraps. The remoras benefit .
from this relationship, the shark is not affected at all.

Grazing

Many animals like rabbits, goats, sheeps, cows, buffaloes and horses feed on grasses.
This mode of feeding is called grazing and these animals are called grazers. These
animals live in pastureland where they feed on grasses, herbs and shrubs. If too many
animals are kept on pasture, they eat the grasses down to the root though grasses
are more resistant than herbaceous plants and have ability to regrow very fast, but
the hooves of grazing animals trample the soil into hard layer as a result of which rain
water will not penetrate this soil. It runs off from the upper surface removing the fertile
topsoil with it. The final result of over - grazing is totally barren land. Grazing is very
important factor in determining the ecosystem. Moderate grazing is very helpful to
maintain grassland ecosystem. It destroys the competitors and helps the grass to grow
well. Over grazing may lead to the transformation of a grassland into a desert.

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLES

The chemical elements essential for life in living organisms are called biogenic elements
or nutrient elements. Macronutrients are elements required by organisms in large
amount like water, carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulphur and
calcium. Micronutrients are elements required by organisms in small quantity or in
trace amount like zinc, molybdenum, iron, iodine. The nutrient cycles are also called
biogeochemical cycles as the nutrients move from living to nonliving to living portions
of ecosystem in a cyclic manner.

The Nitrogen Cycle

The chief reservoir of nitrogen is the atmosphere; in fact nitrogen makes up 78 percent
of the gases in atmosphere. Since most living things, however, cannot use elemental
atmospheric nitrogen to make amino acids and other nitrogen containing compounds,
they are dependent on nitrogen present in soil minerals. So, despite the abundance of
nitrogen in the atmosphere, shortage of nitrogen in the soil is often the major limiting
factor in plant growth. The process by which this limited amount of nitrogen is circulated
and re-circulated throughout the world of living organisms is known as the nitrogen
cycle (Fig. 25.5).

Animation 25.4: Nitrogen Cycle
Source and Credit:

@)

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Nitrogen in Atmosphere (Nz)
insert Nitrogen poal

Assimilation

*)

Biclogical M-fixation
hy symbiotic bactaria

Denitrification

by denitrifying
% bacteria ar
Bay Ar moanifica tar
by ammonitying
Biological N-fixation my haderia

by free-living bacteria e* )
Nitrification by
Nitritying bacteria )

A

Atmospheric N-fixation

Fig 25.5 The Nitrogen Cycle

Three principal stages of this cycle are, ammonification, nitrification, and
assimilation.

Much of the nitrogen found in the soil is the result of the decomposition of organic
materials and is in the form of complex organic compounds, such as proteins, amino
acids, nucleic acids and nucleotides. These nitrogenous compounds are usually rapidly
decomposed into simple compounds by soil-dwelling organisms chiefly bacteria and
fungi. These microorganisms use the proteins and amino acids and release excess of
ammonia (NH,) or ammonium ions (NH,* ). This process is known as ammonification.

Several bacteria in soil are able to oxidize ammonia or ammonium ions, this oxidation
is known as nitrification.

Although the plants can utilize ammonium directly, nitrate is the form in which
most nitrogen moves from the soil into the roots. Once nitrate is within the plant
cell, it is reduced back to ammonium. In contrast to the nitrification, this assimilation
process requires energy. The ammonium ions thus formed are transferred to carbon
- containing compounds to produce amino - acids and other nitrogenous organic
compounds needed by the plant.

Animation 25.5: Nitrogen Cycle

Source and Credit: OrganicSoilTechnology


25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Nitrogen Depletion and its Remedies

Although the nitrogen cycle appears complete and self - sustaining, nitrates are
steadily lost due to the soil erosion, fire and water percolating down through the
soil. Nitrates are also lost as a result of the activities of certain soil bacteria; in the
absence of oxygen these bacteria break down nitrates releasing nitrogen back into
the atmosphere and using the oxygen for their own respiration. This process is known
as denitrification, in poorly drained (poorly aerated) soils. The cycle is maintained
despite these losses primarily by the activities of the nitrogen - fixing bacteria, which
incorporate gaseous nitrogen from air into organic nitrogen containing compounds.
Just as all organisms are ultimately dependent on photosynthesis for energy, they
all depend on nitrogen fixation for their nitrogen. Soil nitrogen resources are also
strengthened by the addition of nitrogen ferlitizers by the man himself.
The flow of Energy in Food Chain of an Ecosystem

Energy in the form of radiant heat and light from the sun flows through an ecosystem
passing through the different trophic levels (links) and radiates again back into outer
Space. The total amount of energy fixed by plants is gross primary production. The
amount of energy left after plants have met their respiratory needs is net primary
production, which shows up as plant biomass.

Animation 25.6:Flow of Energy
Source and Credit:

About 1% of the total energy from the sun is trapped by the producers in an ecosystem.
The remaining 99% of solar energy is used to evaporate water, heat up soil and is then
lost to the outer space. As energy is transferred from one trophic level to the next,
from producer to primary consumer, between 80 to 90% of last as the original energy
is heat as a by product of respiration. However, a continuous flux of energy from the
sun prevents ecosystem from running down. A pyramid of energy can be constructed
showing energy transfer in a community of organisms.

1%Sun's

Mineral elements in feces
excretory and decay
products recycled

on earth
, cote | | Decomposers
energy
100% | 1%

Heat energy lost into outer space

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

A short food chain of two or three links supports a community more efficiently than a
long chain of five Links where much of the original energy from the producers would
never reach those organisms at higher trophic levels. Decomposers are able to obtain
energy by converting plant and animal tissues and waste into inorganic mineral ions.

Tertiary
consumers

Secondary
consumers

Primary
consumers

producers

Energy at each Trophic Level frome 1,000,000 Keal of sunlight per m’per yr

An Energy Pyramid

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Q1_ sCFill in the blanks.

1. A group of similar organisms living together in space and time is called

2. Organisms which can synthesize their own food are called____.

3. Animals, non-green plants and microorganisms directly or indirectly depend upon
green plants for their food so they so are called

Q.2 Write whether the statement is true or false and write the correct statement
if false.

1. At different places in an environment when you study only one population, it will be synecology.
2. Abiotic components include all living components.

3. Primary succession starting in a pond is called xerosere.

4, The animal that is caught and eaten is the predator.

5. Endoparasites live inside the body of the host.

Q.4 Short questions.

. What are the biogeochemical cycles?

. Sketch three mainsteps in nitrogen cycle.

. Define grazing.

. What percentage of sun energy reaches to plants?
. What is autecology?

. Define synecology.

NU KBRWDN >

@)

25. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Q.5 Extensive Questions.

1. Define environment. What must environment supply for insects, green plants, birds, animals
and people?

2. What factors in the environment can affect all living things? Are they important to survive in a
biome?

3, What can you conclude about all the physical and biological factors in an environment?

4. What is biosphere? What must the biosphere provide for living things? Why is a biosphere absent
on moon?

5. Define succession. Discuss succession on land.

CHAPTER

26

some Major
Ecosystems

Animation 26: Some major Ecosystem
ource & Credit: Wikispaces

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

In the previous chapter, you have learned about the ecosystem. In this chapter, we will
discuss the aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, climate and weather.
CLIMATE

Life on earth, specially on land, is affected by both weather and climate. Weather refers
to short-term fluctuations in temperature, humidity, cloud cover, wind and precipitation
over periods of hours or days. Climate, in contrast, refers to overall patterns of weather
that prevail from year to year even century-to-century in a particular region.

AQUATIC OR HYDROSPHERIC ECOSYSTEM

Hydrospheric ecosystem is a “system in water where living and non-living components
exchange materials and transfer of energy also takes place within water”. Salt-water
ocean and sea are the largest ecosystems on the earth forming about 71% of its surface.

Fresh water ecosystems, in contrast, covers less than 1%. The unique properties of

water lend some common features to aquatic ecosystem.

1. Temperature: Water changes its temperature slower than air, so temperature in
aquatic ecosystem is more moderate to support life.

2. Absorption of energy: Although water may appear quite transparent, it absorbs a
considerable amount of the light energy that sustains life. Even in clearest water, the
intensity of light decreases rapidly with depth, so at the depth of 600 feet or more, a
little light is left to power photosynthesis.

3. Nutrients : The nutrients in aquatic ecosystem tend to be concentrated near the
bottom sediments supporting life where light levels often are too low to support
photosynthesis.

4, Abundant water with appropriate temperature : Water is an essential requirement
for life. It is available abundantly in aquatic ecosystem to support life. The major
factors that detennine the quantity and type of life in aquatic ecosystems are energy
and nutrient. Appropriate temperature is present in aquatic ecosystem to carry out

all metabolic processes.

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

the clear water (c) and fish such as this blue jack swim, (d) the photosynthetic phytoplankton
are the producers on which most other life ultimately depends, (e) phytoplankton are eaten b

ooplankton, represented by this microscopic crustacean, a copepod. The spiny projections
on these planktonic creatures help to keep them from sinking below the photic zone.

Animation 26.1: Aquatic Ecosystem
Source & Credit:Water System

@)

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Productivity of Aquatic Ecosystem
The productivity can be indicated by consumption of CO, and evolution of oxygen in
the process of photosynthesis.

The productivity of aquatic ecosystem is basically determined by the light and nutrients.
Light intensity and quality vary with the water depth, so the primary productivity also
varies with light. The amount of nutrients also changes with season. Productivity also
varies from zone to zone. Aquatic environment can easily be classified into fresh water
and marine (salty) water.

Fresh Water Lakes

Fresh water lakes vary tremendously in size, depth, and nutrient content, including
distinct life zones and temperature stratification.

Life zones are based on access to light and nutrients : The distribution of life in lakes
depends on access to light, to nutrients and to place for attachment. The lake ecosystem
can be divided into three main zones.

Littoral zone (Near-shore): In this zone, the water is shallow, and plants find abundant
light, anchorage and adequate nutrients from the bottom sediments. Plants in littoral
zone communities are the most diverse; water lilies and entirely submerged vascular
plants and algae flourish at the deepest region of the littoral zone.. The plants of this
zone trap sediments carried by stream, increasing the nutrient content in.this region.
Living among the anchored plants are microscopic organisms called plankton. These
can be divided into two groups. Phytoplankton (Greek “drifting plants”): these include
photosynthetic protista, bacteria and algae. Zooplankton (Greek “drifting animals”):
such as protozoa and tiny crustaceans. The greatest diversity of animals in the lake is
also found in this zone. Littoral invertebrate animals include small crustaceans, insect
larvae, snails flatworms, Hydra; vertebrates include frogs, aquatic snakes and turtles.
As the water increases in depth farther from the shore, plants are unable to anchor to
the bottom and still collect enough light for photosynthesis. This open water area is
divided into two regions: the upper limnetic zone and the lower profundal zone.

©

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

As the water increases in depth farther from the shore, plants are unable to anchor to
the bottom and still collect enough light for photosynthesis. This open water area is
divided into two regions: the upper limnetic zone and the lower profundal zone.
Limnetic zone : In this zone enough light penetrates to support photosynthesis. Here,
phytoplankton includes cyanobacteria (blue green algae) which serve as producers.
These are eaten by protozoa and small crustaceans, which in turn are consumed by
fishes.

"surface :
-organisms = aes
O see A GE EO Re > emi® AW, }
3 hyto-
Sroopaniton plankton

Fig. 26.2 Lake, life zones There are three life zones in a typical lake : a near-shore littoral zone with rooted plants, an open-
water limnetic zone, and a deep, dark profundal zone.

Profundal zone : Here, light is insufficient to support photosynthesis. The organisms
of this zone are mainly nourished by detritus that falls from the littoral and limnetic
zone and by incoming sediment. Decomposers and detritus feeders, such as, snails
and certain insect larvae, bacteria, fungi and fishes, inhabit it.

©)

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Intervention of Man in Aquatic Ecosystem

Human activities may greatly accelerate the process of eutrophication (adequate
nurition), because nutrients are carried into lakes from farm feedlots and sewage.
Even if solid wastes are removed, water discharged from sewage treatment plant
is often rich in phosphate and nitrates dissolved from wastes and detergents. Rain
water washes off fertilizer from fields where the manure of thousands of cattle is
accumulated. The water therefore, becomes highly enriched. The added nutrients
Support excessive growth of phytoplankton. Producers like blue-green algae form
a scum on the lake surface, depriving the submerged plants of sun light; as a result
they die. The dead plants bodies are decomposed by bacteria, utilizing the oxygen
present in the water, deprived of oxygen, fish, snails and insect larvae die and
their decaying bodies fuel more bacterial growth, further depleting oxygen. Even
without oxygen, certain bacteria that produce foul smelling gases thrive. Although
it is full of life and nutrients, polluted lake smells bad. Most of the trophic levels
including the fish are eliminated and the bacteria and blue- green algae dominate
the community. Another very serious cause of polluted water is the acid produced
by burning of fossil fuels, which poses a different threat to fresh-water ecosystem.
Few organisms can withstand the low pH of acidified lakes.

TERRESTRIAL OR LITHOSPHERIC ECOSYSTEM

Light, Nutrients and Water

The ecosystem present on land or soil is called terrestrial or lithospheric ecosystem.
Terrestrial ecosystem receives plenty of light, and the soil provides abundant
nutrients. Water, however, is limited and very unevenly distributed both in place
and in time. Factors which influence life on land are given below :

Temperature: Like water, favourable temperatures are very unevenly distributed
on land in place and time. On poles, the average temperature is below freezing. In
temperate zones, only during certain seasons of the year it is quite favorable, but in
tropical zones uniformly, warm, moist climate is present.

Air: In terrestrial ecosystem, air is in constant motion, so its composition is more
uniform. The amount of 0 2 and C 02 in air is much constant and most beneficial to
terrestrial ecosystem.

Adaptations for Terrestrial Ecosystem

©)

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Plants and animals shifting from water to land developed various types of adaptations
for land habitat e.g.
Supporting tissues : Both plants and animals have evolved supporting tissues like vascular bundles
(xylem-phloem) in plants and skeleton in animals to support them on land against the force of
gravity.
Conservation of water : Plants and animals evolved various methods to conserve water in their
body e.g. homeostasis. The mechanism of temperature regulation was developed by land plants
and animals by developing bark and skin respectively.
Division of Terrestrial Ecosystem
It can be divided into following main types such as
1. Forest ecosystem. It is further sub-divided into :

(a) tropical rain forests (6) temperate deciduous forests

(c) coniferous alpine and boreal forests
2. Grass land ecosystem. 3. Desert ecosystem. 4. Tundra ecosystem.

TO) Tropical Rain forest WE Chaparral TW) Coniferous Forest
"| Tropical Deciduous Forest (ggg) Temperature Deciduous Forest (9) Tundra and Alpine vegetation
Desert EE Temperature Rain Forest HE ico
___ Savanna and Tropical ME Grasstand
Shrub Forest

@

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 26.3 The distribution of biomes Although mountain ranges and the sheer s >f the
continents complicate their pattern, note the overall consistencies. Tundra and coniferous
forest always occur in the northernmost parts of the Northern Hemisphere, while the deserts
of Mexico, the Sahara, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, and Australia are located around 20° to
30° North and South latitude

SOME MAJOR ECOSYSTEMS IN PAKISTAN

Pakistan has a variety of seasons and climate ranging from hot dry in plains to cold snowy
on mountains. Some major ecosystems existing in Pakistan are;

1 Temperate Deciduous | Shogran and Neelam valley.
Forests.

Coniferous Alpine and|Northern mountains of

Boreal Forests Kaghan, Malam Jabba
(Swat) Dir and Chilas

Grassland Ecosystem. Gilgit and Kashmir.
Waziristan, lower Chitral
and North Kallat.

Desert Ecosystem (Mianwalli, Bakhar) (Fort
Abbas, Bahawal Nagar,
Yazman, Bahawal Pur, Khan
Pur and RahimYar- Khan.
Sind.

2

3

4

5 Tundra Ecosystem. Mountains Kara-Koram and
Hindukush.


26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Temperate Deciduous Forests

In Pakistan, temperate moist conditions are present in Neelam valley and Shogran.
These forests originally covered India, Southeast Asia, eastern North America, Europe,
China, Australia, Japan, North and South America. Slightly farther away from the equator,
the rainfall is not nearly as constant, and there are pronounced wet and dry seasons
that means distinct summer and winter seasons. During dry season, the trees cannot
get enough water from the soil to compensate for evaporation from their leaves. As
a result, the plants have adapted to the dry season by shedding their leaves, thereby
minimizing water loss. If the rains fail to return on schedule, the trees delay forming
new leaves until the drought passes.

Rain fall: The average rainfall is between 750 - 1500 mm.
Temperature : Moderate temperature ranges from 4°C - 30°C.

Plants : Some dominant plants are Taxus baccata, Pinus wallichiana, Berberis lyceum.
Many herbs and shrubs are with height of 5m. Some grasses, ferns and other herbaceous
plants make up field layer. At the bottom or floor level many mosses liverworts and
lichens covered with litter layer are present.

Animal life: Some very common animals are Macca multata(rhesus monkey), Solenorctos
ubetanus (black bear), Felis bengalensis (leopard cat), deer, and wolves with various types
of microorganisms to convert the litter into organic matter such as bacteria, fungi, and
earthworms.

Fig. 26.4 Temperate deciduous forest (a) White tailed deer is the
largest herbivore, (b) Woodland wildflowrs (c) Blue Jay (bird)

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Soil condition : The soil of temperate deciduous forest is grayish brown in colour, very
fertile and rich in organic matter, with maximum water holding capacity.

Human impact : On temperate deciduous forest large mammals such as black bear,
deer, wolves, bobcats and mountain lions were formerly abundant, but the predators
have been largely wiped out by humans. Need of lumber and its use in agriculture has
reduced many deciduous forests from the world.

Coniferous Alpine and Boreal Forests

In Pakistan these forests are in upper Kaghan, Dir and Chilas, Malam Jaba in Swat
valley. In the world, they stretch across Eurasia (Europe + Asia) and North America,
Canada just south of the tundra. Northern coniferous forests are also called Taiga.
Conditions in taiga are harsher than those in the temperate deciduous forest. The
winters are longer and colder, and the growing season is shorter. The few months
of warm weather are too short to allow trees the luxurious growth of regrowing. As
a result, evergreen coniferous trees populate this type of forest, almost entirely with
small waxy needles. The waxy coating and small surface area of the needles reduce
water loss by evaporation during cold months, and leaves remain on the trees year
around. Coniferous forests located at high altitude are called alpine while coniferous
forests located at high latitude are called boreal. Can you differentiate between altitude
and latitude?

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Fig. 26.5 The Taiga The small needles and pyramidal shape of conifers allows them to shed
heavy snows. Winter is a challenge not only for the trees but also for animals such as this
snowshoe hare and the bobcat that preys on it (a). The hare is also prey for the great home
owl (b). Taiga animals face diminished food supply but increased energy requirements
during subfreezing weather.

There is a constant cover of snow characterized by long
severe winter. Temperatures may be below freezing point, up to 10 °C.
Because of its harsh climate, the diversity of life is much low.
Large mammals, bison, wolf, black bear, deer, Marco polo sheep and smaller animals
such as small Kashmir flying squirrel, snowshoe hare, wolverine, crossbills, are present.’
Plants like Pinus wallichiana, Pirius roxburgii, Abies pindrow, Picea smithianci Cederous
deodara are present.
Due to severity of climate and remoteness most ofthe coniferous forests
remains undisturbed, but these forests are major source of lumber for construction,
So forests have been cleared in the world.

Grassland ecosystems are found in Gilgit, Kashmir, Waziristan, lower Chitral and North
Kallat. In the world, you can see a large grassland in the center of Eurasian continents.
Grassland present in temperate climates are also called Prairies, such as Prairies of
North America, Pampas of Argentina. These grasslands do not have woody plants so
they are known as Prairies. But the grassland in tropical climates have woody trees and
are called Savanna.

Fig. 26.6 Grass land ecosystem (a) Pronghorn antelope (b)
Prairie dogs (c) Bison herds (d) Coneflower

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Rain fall: The grasslands usually face severe droughts(26.7).Annual rainfall is about
250 to 750 ml. In tropical and subtropical grasslands, rainfall eaches about 1500 mm
(60 inches). Thus grassland occurs in regions where mean annual rainfall is midway
between a forest and a desert. In general, they have a continuous cover of grass and
virtually no trees at all except along the rivers. Water and Fire are the crucial factors in
die competition between grasses and trees.

Plant life: The dominant spebies are graminoids i.e. grasses, and grass-like plants.
Certain forbs such as composites, legumes and many other herbaceous plant species
are also associated with grasses.

Layering: Layering is the characteristic of grassland. Tall grasses (Andropogon, Panicum)
form the first) layer, mid high grasses (Stipa, Sporobolus, Oryzopsis) form the second
layer and third layer is formed by short grasses and forbs and warfare species (Poa,
Bromus) with mosses and lichens.

Drought Rising sea levels

Fig 26.7
Soil conditions : The soil moisture is limited on account of low precipitation and high

evaporation. Upper soil layer in which grasses are rooted is normally moist but deeper
layers are constantly dry. The soil of grassland is basically impermeable with excessive
Salinity.

Animal life : Dominant species are herbivores; invertebrates including insects are very
numerous, grasshoppers become so numerous that they can compete with other
herbivores for plant foliage. The predators are reptiles, amphibians and mammals. For
example, lizards, toads and turtles prey on insects; foxes and wolves among mammals
are very common. Among decomposers many bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi like
molds, yeasts, mushrooms, bracket fungi are most common. Large animals like zebras,

wild horses, bisons are important.

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Productivity ; In temperate grassland the rate of primary production is about 700 -
1500 g/m? annually. In sub-humid tropical grassland it is more than 4000 g/m? . In
annual grasslands, large grazing animals consume relatively small amount (5 - 10%) of
the total herbage produced. Invertebrates, rodents and birds may consume an equal
amount or a little more.

Human impact: The natural grasslands in the world are used for crop production and
live stock management. Only a small fraction of the world’s grasslands has been in
cultivation due to acid climatic condition with soil erosion and salinity. Grazing has
prominent effects on grassland; over-grazing causes reduction in herbage cover
and result is soil erosion. Many lands are converted into deserts by a process called
desertification due to over grazing

Desert Ecosystem

In Pakistan you can find the desert ecosystem in western Punjab (Mianwali and Bukhar)
where it is known as “Thai”.

(a) Sand dunes (b) Thar desert

Fig 26.8

In southern Punjab, areas like Fort Abbass, Bahawal Nagar, Yazman, Bahawal Pur
(Cholistan), Knan pur and Rahim yar khan also have deserts.

In Sindh, this desert ecosystem is called “Thar”.

These biomes are found on every continent often around 20 to 30 north and south
latitude and also in the rain shadows of major mountain ranges. Desert includes a
variety of environments. At one extreme are certain areas of the Sahara or Chile, where
it virtually never tains and there is no vegetation at all (Fig. 26.8a).

@)

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

The more common deserts, however, are characterized by widely spaced vegetation
and large areas of bare ground.

Rain fall: Less than 25 to 50 cm (10 - 20 inches) or not at all.

Plant life: The plants are often spaced evenly as if planted by hand (Fig 26.8b) Frequently,
the perennial plants are bushes or cacti with large shallow root systems.

Plants are covered with the waterproof waxy coating to prevent evaporation of
precious water. Water is stored in thick stems of cacti and other succulents. Desert
plants conserve water in a variety of ways. Cacti and Euphorbia have fleshy stems in
which water is stored for use during the period of drought.

Animal! life: Like plants, animals are also specially adapted to survive on little water.
Most deserts appear to be almost completely devoid of animal life during day, because
the animals seek relief from the sun and heat in cool under ground burrows. In the
dark, when desert cools down, homed lizards, snakes and other reptiles emerge to
feed, as do mammals siich as kangaroo, rat, and birds such as burrowing owl.

Most of the smaller animals survive without ever drinking at all, getting all the water
they need from their food and what produced during cellular respiration in their tissues.
Large animals such as desert bighorn sheep and camel are dependent on permanent
water holes during the driest times of the year.

Human im pact: While human activities are reducing the extent of many biomes, they
are causing the spread of deserts, a process called desertification.

A dramatic example is occurring in the Sahel, which borders the southern edge of the
Sahara desert in Africa. Twenty-five years of below average rainfall, coupled with rapid
growth of the human population have caused a steady southward spread of desert.
The Sahel is an example of a human population exceeding the carrying capacity of the
land. The loss of the productivity of the ecosystem is nearly irreversible and massive
famines, such has occurred in Ethiopia in the mid 1980s are a tragic result.

The last biome seen before reaching the polar ice-caps is the arctic tundra, a vast treeless
region bordering the Arctic ocean. It is used to describe types of vegetation in

treeless high latitudes between taiga and polar ice caps, and at high altitude across the
mountain above timberline such as mountain of Karakoram and Koh Hindu Kush in Pakistan.

—_—

*
at
i

Fig. 26.9 Tundra : Vegetation and animals, (a) Caribou (b)
Arctic foxe (c) Dwarf clover (wild flower)

Aractic tundra stretches across Northern North America, Northern Europe and Siberia
(with high latitude).

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Plant and animal life : The ground is carpeted with small perennial flowers and dwarf
willows no more than a few centimeters tall often with large lichen called reindeer
moss. The standing pools provide superb mosquito habitat. The mosquitoes and other
insects provide food for numerous birds (ducks and geese) most of which migrate a
long distance to nest and raise their young during the brief summer feast. The tundra
vegetation supports lemmings, which are eaten by wolves, snowy owls, arctic foxes
and even grizzly bears.

Human impact: The tundra is perhaps the most fragile of all the biomes because of
its short growing season. A willow 10 centimeter (4 inches) high may have a trunk 7
centimeter (3 inches) in diameter and be 50 years old. Human activities in the tundra
leave scars that persist for centuries. Fortunately, for the tundra inhabitants, the impact
of civilization is localized around oil drilling sites, pipelines, mines and military bases.
Humans and Ecosystems

The expanding human population has left relatively few ecosystems undisturbed. Our
impact on natural ecosystem are so diverse and wide ranging that they far exceed the
scope of this book. Ecosystems dominated by people tend to be simple, that is, they
have fewer species and fewer community interactions than an undisturbed ecosystem

Tundra

Coniferous forest (taiga)
a
al

Temp=rrabure
naan forest

Cool desert Cool grassland

Tee aire
Gecedueis forest

High +. Temperature ——_———— Low

Tropical Tropical
Wram desert Warm grassland Savanna Piet ee icaet

Fig. 26.10 Temperature and rainfall influence on biome distribution

26.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab

Q1_sCFill in the blanks.

1. Water is slower to heat and than air.

2. The distribution of life in lakes depends on access to , and to place for attachment.
3. Ecosystem on land is also known as ecosystem.

4. Ecosystem in water is also called as ecosystem.

Q.2 Short questions.

1. Defnle productivity of an ecosystem.

2. List four adaptations in plants and animals for terrestrial ecosystem.
3. Name three zones in lake ecosystem.

4, How many biomes are present in the world, name only five of them.
5. Give the names of some major ecosystems on land in Pakistan.

Q.4 Extensive Questions

1. What are the four major requirements for life? Which two are limiting in terrestrial
ecosystem?

2. List some adaptations of

3. (a) desert plants (b) desert animals to heat and drought.

4, Where is life in oceans (hydrospheric ecosystem) most abundant and why?

5. Distinguish between three different zones in the lake - ecosystem.

